SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
37;"Many thx for your kind note. I wish I felt better about Iraqis as a result, but I truly remain worried about these people.
They are truly a collective pain in the neck. Chris
This e-mail is unclassified based on the definitions outlined in E.O. 12958
*** Sent from my BlackBerry Wireless Handheld ***"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
143;"I'm heading back from meetings on women, peace and security at NATO. The chief implementer of WPS at DOD also
traveled with me. It was extremely productive. SG Rasmussen chaired a meeting on 1325 today of all the NATO member
and partner ambassadors incl DaIcier. The new NATO special rep for 1325 -- the position sponsored by Norway and
approved at the Chicago summit — gave her inaugural address, and my DOD colleague and I discussed the US efforts
both generally and in Afghanistan. We were followed by extensive remarks from the NATO ambassadors, all of whom
touched on the importance of women's role in security and NATO's mission, as well as applauded US leadership. Many
mentioned you in their interventions! The ambs from Serbia, Azerbaijan and Georgia pointed to their own national
action plans (their existence was a surprise to us), as well as the new structures they have put in place to implement
them. The ambassador from Azerbaijan even said that he is hopeful women will contribute to ending their regional
conflict (I will tell Morningstar). The new special rep - a seasoned diplomat who knows her way around NATO --- wanted
me to ten you how much you have inspired her -- something I hear everywhere!
I'm confident our NATO visit also served to reinforce the importance of the NAP and the US role with our own people
both at NATO and DOD.
I was sorry to miss the discussion with ASSK but there are more events with her tomw. We are working hard on getting
the engagement of Burmese women into the formal peace structures being put in place to end the ethnic conflicts.
I also met with Vivian Redding at the EU who, despite her efforts, is unlikely to get a quota for women on public boards
of directors adopted. She too expressed her admiration of you and your leadership.
In addition to everything that's been said about Chris Stevens, he really understood the important role the women in
Libya were playing in peace and security. Whenever I met with Libyan women at meetings in the region, they went out
of their way to tell me how much he supported them and how much affection they had for him. Such an awful loss.
You've been magnificent throughout all this, despite how wrenching it's been.
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739739
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045409"
143;Your message was delivered to the recipient.
143;"PVerveer
B6
Sunday, March 29, 2009 7:57 PM
Re: Thank you for meeting
I'll be there if the Republicans don't try to stop me!
In a message dated 3/29/2009 7:47:13 P.M. Eastern Daylight Time, hdr22@clintonemail.com writes:
Thanks, Melanne, and congrats on your hearing. I hope you're at work when I get back next week! I'll see what I
can do to focus on Zohra's concerns. Best, H"
143;"Burns, this is going to happen. We are committed to herwork and other docs like her. Lyn heard rumors about a
competitive hospital, etc. We will work this out.
HRC did the event at her hospital, after all."
143;"See below
Yunus still very concerned about future of Grameen"
143;"Sorry you had to go through this.
Sent via BlackBerry from T-Mobile"
143;"Dear Margaret.
On Behalf Of Paul Charron
.orr; chs.cking n from New York City; the xilter of the uniwrse. I wanted to see whether anything was up on
1'3 Cortvf_Tiatiori.s„
It sednis that Obama is having a lot of difficulty getting business people involved in his various
initiatives. At least that is the sense I get from reading the papers. I know that Hillary is well connected to a
nuniber tit UUSIlIeSS people bui. haven' seen many of them show up in any kind of supporting roles.
I have plenty to do, but it certainly seems that my background and experience could be helpful in some
capacity. reii:;:ase let me know wr.at you are seeing.
Thanks.
Paul
pa.ui.charron
I3"
143;"Thp nnrzninp <Aganvolvins Yunus n ri Hasina.
BEST COPY
AVAILABLE"
143;"PVerveer
Tuesday, September 1, 2009 11:01 PM
H
reinesp@state.gov; abedinh@state.gov
Fwd: From Lisa Ling"
143;"Glamour has provided an excellent update and the good news is that Nujood is in private school and attending regularly.
Melanne S. Verveer
Ambassador at Large for Global Women's Issues
U.S. Department of State
2201 C Street NW, Room 6805
Washington, DC 20520
Tel: (202) 647-7283
Fax: (202) 647-7288
VerveerM5@state.gov"
143;Yes it is at variance, perhaps not surprising. However, post is also involved so we will be getting another assessment.
143;"Verveer, Melanne S <VerveerMS@state.gov>
Friday, September 04, 2009 2:55 PM
H
Swanee
We were judging the candidates for the Swanee Hunt Award which goes annually to a FS0 and a FSN judged superior
for integrating women's issues into their work. T hey are nominated by ambassadors at posts or AS's here.
I called her because we had a tie for the FSO's and I wanted to see if she'd provide a second monetary award so we
wouldn't have to divide the $5k. She agreed and then told me
State will fly in the awardees and the Secry usually gives out the award. Swanee is hoping that she'll be able to come and
be there for the brief ceremony.
I thought you'd want to know.
Melanne S. Verveer
Ambassador at Large for Global Women's Issues
U.S. Department of State
2201 C Street NW, Room 6805
Washington, DC 20520
Tel: (202) 647-7283
Fax: (202) 647-7288
VerveerMS@state.gov
72"
143;"Yes, trying to find a time to meet with Cherie. Also, fyi, a few years ago, I worked to advise Sheikha Mosa on
how to organize her office vis a vis her foundation, etc. She was always taken by how effective you were as
First Lady. I worked with Booz Allen on the project. She is very impressive."
143;"PVerveer
Saturday, September 19, 2009 10:15 PM
H
Fwd: list of 5 update
1541-TransmissionEtatdebesoin.pdf
Thought you'd be interested in this --
on the status of the ""notorious 5"" you raised with Kabila.
I will get to Johnnie Carson too. I think we will have to follow up through best channel."
143;"Melanne S. Verveer
Ambassador at Large for Global Women's Issues U.S. Department of State
2201 C Street NW, Room 6805
Washington, DC 20520
Tel: (202) 647-7283
Fax: (202) 647-7288
VerveerMS@state.gov"
143;"I'm seeing Yunus tom'w. We're both speaking to the Hilton Foundation. He wants to meet with me there. I will learn
more."
143;"I talked to Yunus. She is making any progess very difficult. The health project he discussed with yoiu can't get OKs from
govt for Nursing school, univ health center, corporate partnerships, etc. If she hears it's Grameen, she stands in way of
licenses, etc, even tho it benefits the country.
He was hoping there might be some way to assure her that he has NO intention of getting into politics in any way and
that she can use him effectively to make the country a model in ways that Grameen can do that. There is some deep
personal antagonism that he can't fathom. Very sad development."
143;I will ask but I think if she senses he's bewhind thew request matters will get worse.
143;"What a remarkable achievement to get the Turks and Armenians to come this far together. You are deservedly getting
good poSitive press for your efforts.
I just wanted you to know that the women in NI with whom you ""walked the walk"" over the years are eagerly looking
forward to seeing you. They were so incredibly helpful during your campaign telling the story of what you did to support
them, and as we know -- and as they have shown -- women are critical both to the peace process and to the peace
holding. Inez is planning to welcome you with a few words -- as she has done for over a decade. I will be with you all in
spirit."
143;"Yes, I read the story yesterday and have been in touch with Glamour and our post. I think her family needs to be
compensated in some way because they raise feeding her and transportation as expenses they can't meet in order to
send her to school.
Melanne S. Verveer
Ambassador at Large for Global Women's Issues U.S. Department of State
2201 C Street NW, Room 6805
Washington, DC 20520
Tel: (202) 647-7283
Fax: (202) 647-7288
VerveerMS@state.gov"
143;"Back Tuesday
Speaking at UNESCO Monday with the new director on the unfinished Beijing agenda called to say she
wants to give us several million dollars to subsidize a fund to give an annual award for innovation in empowering women
that would be a rockefeller-State partnership. It would have a selection comm and we'd have to run all the traps, but
this could be huge. We could name after you if L would allow. I have to work oin this when I get back."
143;Ok
143;"I've had wonderfully constructive conversations with him and we've got, what we both think is a terrific plan, but he
really needs to present it to you. Once we have your feedback, we can move on all of this. It's all very exciting and he's
the best.
Melanne S. Verveer
Ambassador at Large for Global Women's Issues U.S. Department of State
2201 C Street NW, Room 6805
Washington, DC 20520
Tel: (202) 647-7283
Fax: (202) 647-7288
VerveerMS@state.gov"
143;"I have been trying, but the first feedback I got was maybe he should meet with Cheryl, et al. Frankly, he is following up
on his last conversation with you so we should just all get together with you. I will get with Lona today.
Melanne S. Verveer
Ambassador at Large for Global Women's Issues U.S. Department of State
2201 C Street NW, Room 6805
Washington, DC 20520
Tel: (202) 647-7283
Fax: (202) 647-7288
VerveerMS@state.gov"
143;"This is from from Egypt
FYI — what they are saying.
Melanne S. Verveer
Ambassador at Large for Global Women's Issues
U.S. Department of State
2201 C Street NW, Room 6805
Washington, DC 20520
Tel: (202) 647-7283
Fax: (202) 647-7288
VerveerMS@state.gov"
143;"ok
Melanne S. Verveer
Ambassador at Large for Global Women's Issues U.S. Department of State
2201 C Street NW, Room 6805
Washington, DC 20520
Tel: (202) 647-7283
Fax: (202) 647-7288
VerveerMS@state.gov"
143;"the Media.docx; 102809-BM-Democracy Assistance Dialogue.docx; 102809-BM-
Foundation for the Future.doc; 102809-BM-Gender Institute.doc
Here's some general background info on FFF from NEA.
The gender initiative has potential but right now it's just a framework. It's going to take leadership. There are so many
good practices in the region that could be shared -- Morocco's family law reform being an excellent example."
143;"I'm writing in the hope that when you're in Afghanistan you will be able to demonstrate in some public way your support
for the Afghan women. There is much disillusionment over the aftermath of the elections and the ongoing violence. It
would be a wonderful signal to the women that we do value the role that they are and must continue to play to move
Afghanistan forward.
Secondly, it would also be helpful because there is growing concern at home that the women are going to be abandoned.
I have to meet with Sen. Casey tom'w, for example. He believes that the women are critical to stability and peace in
Afghanistan and wants to discuss our commitment.
Lastly, as Pres, Karzai is beginning to plan his cabinet, perhaps you could mention to him the need to bring in some of the
talented and experienced women into his government. At our Shura meeting yesterday, we discussed upcoming
ministerial positions. We, of course, have no guarantee that Karzai will listen, but his government would be a lot better if
he tapped women and so many are highly qualified.
Thanks."
143;"I know you're embarked on another big trip and wish you well.
I met with Reema Navatany, Ela Bhatt's right hand, whom you know. She sends her greetings and underscored again
what you mean to them. SEWA is on the cutting edge of so many exciting developments.
We had a great conversation on many things, including how much women in the developing world can and must do to
address climate change and drive low tech green industries. In the villages, I could feel the pollution in my eyes and
throat -- so much needs to be done at the local level. Much pollution is produced because of the way women cook, etc.
When I get back, will work up some ideas on this. Delhi's been enshrouded in smog for the last couple days.
The SEWA project I visited 2 hours outside of Delhi was so impressive. Women who were among the poorst of the poor
had become businesswomen capable of traveling to London and Brussels to negotiate contracts with companies for
their embroidery etc We're going to have SEWA play a key role in the Vital Voices summit that you announced that will
take place here next year.
Maria Otero was still here when - arrived so she joined me for the SEWA mtgs.
I also went to one of Rushira Gupta's antitrafficking projects. You know her as we've been working with her thru WH
years. She got the global citizens award at CGI this year. I don't think I've seen worse conditions than what she's trying to
address. In Mumbai we launched an anti- trafficking campaign with Bollywood which brought in new players to the
cause.
Tomw, I will be speaking on this year's World Economic Forum Gender Gap report for India. There's so much potential
for India's economic growth -- as the WEF points out --- if they'd tap women's potential here. India is last of the BRIC
countries on most indicators and comes out poorly generally. Will be raising some of these issues with govt in Dialogue
mtgs.
Anyway, I thought of you so much everywhere I went. I'm so happy to be part of your legacy on these issues.
Travel well."
143;"1.4(D)
B1
Heading home after visit to Bangladesh where you are remembered with great affection and where they are eager to
have you make a return visit.
It was a reunion for me in many ways -- the experiences from '95 still vivid, and it was a positive message that I came 1.4(B)
back! 1.4(D)
B1
Our amb there is terrific. (Moriarty). He's going to keep close tabs on the situation. The sum of all this seems to be
political. It's so sad.
I'll give you a fuller readout on this and the trip more generally.
— Reason: 1.4(B), 1.4(D) — Declassify on: 11/16/2024"
143;"jpg
The new year is bound to bring in a continuing wave of crisis around the world. Consider this photo a
momentary respite. It is evocative of the good feeling you engender everywhere. The photo is of the Director
of New Life Center in Chiang Mai. They are doing incredible work there and have made exceptional progress
since your visit. They remember you with great gratitude. I had one of your signed photos left after
distributing the others to the Burmese women human rights leaders (who also felt that you were on their
side).
Everywhere I went over the holidays, there was much favorable comment about your leadership. I'm so proud
to be back working with you. Because you've created such ripples of hope, we've got so much to do!
Love to all the Clintons and best wishes for a healthy, happy, productive and rewarding New Year.
<<New Life Center Foundation 2009.jpg»"
143;"Cover story in the Economist this week. Very big issue when I was in Japan and Korea. Korean parliamentarians want to
get women and economic growth on the G20 agenda when they have the lead next year and we are advocating for Japan
to advance the issue at APEC which they are leading this year.
On another note, so sad about Smith Bagley. He was a good person and was one of your biggest fans.
Women and work
We did it!
Dec 30th 2009
From The Economist print edition
The rich world's quiet revolution: women are
gradually taking over the workplace
Getty Images
AT A time when the world is short of causes for celebration, here is a candidate:
within the next few months women will cross the 50% threshold and become the
majority of the American workforce. Women already make up the majority of
university graduates in the OECD countries and the majority of professional
workers in several rich countries, including the United States. Women run many
of the world's great companies, from PepsiCo in America to Areva in France.
Women's economic empowerment is arguably the biggest social change of our
times. Just a generation ago, women were largely confined to repetitive, menial
jobs. They were routinely subjected to casual sexism and were expected to
abandon their careers when they married and had children. Today they are
running some of the organisations that once treated them as second-class
citizens. Millions of women have been given more control over their own lives.
And millions of brains have been put to more productive use. Societies that try to
resist this trend—most notably the Arab countries, but also Japan and some
southern European countries—will pay a heavy price in the form of wasted talent
and frustrated citizens.
This revolution has been achieved with only a modicum of friction (see article).
Men have, by and large, welcomed women's invasion of the workplace. Yet even
the most positive changes can be incomplete or unsatisfactory. This particular
advance comes with two stings. The first is that women are still under-
represented at the top of companies. Only 2% of the bosses of America's largest
companies and 5% of their peers in Britain are women. They are also paid
significantly less than men on average. The second is that juggling work and
child-rearing is difficult. Middle-class couples routinely complain that they have
too little time for their children. But the biggest losers are poor children—
particularly in places like America and Britain that have combined high levels of
female participation in the labour force with a reluctance to spend public money
on child care.
Dealing with the juggle
These two problems are closely related. Many women feel they have to choose
between their children and their careers. Women who prosper in high-pressure
companies during their 20s drop out in dramatic numbers in their 30s and then
find it almost impossible to regain their earlier momentum. Less-skilled women
are trapped in poorly paid jobs with hand-to-mouth child-care arrangements.
Motherhood, not sexism, is the issue: in America, childless women earn almost as
much as men, but mothers earn significantly less. And those mothers' relative
poverty also disadvantages their children.
Demand for female brains is helping to alleviate some of these problems. Even if
some of the new theories about warm-hearted women making inherently superior
workers are bunk (see article), several trends favour the more educated sex,
including the ""war for talent"" and the growing flexibility of the workplace. Law
firms, consultancies and banks are rethinking their ""up or out"" promotion systems
because they are losing so many able women. More than 90% of companies in
Germany and Sweden allow flexible working. And new technology is making it
easier to redesign work in all sorts of family-friendly ways.
Women have certainly performed better over the past decade than men. In the
European Union women have filled 6m of the 8m new jobs created since 2000. In
America three out of four people thrown out of work since the ""mancession""
began have been male. And the shift towards women is likely to continue: by
2011 there will be 2.6m more female than male university students in America.
The light hand of the state
All this argues, mostly, for letting the market do the work. That has not stopped
calls for hefty state intervention of the Scandinavian sort. Norway has used
threats of quotas to dramatic effect. Some 40% of the legislators there are
women. All the Scandinavian countries provide plenty of state-financed nurseries.
They have the highest levels of female employment in the world and far fewer of
the social problems that plague Britain and America. Surely, comes the argument,
there is a way to speed up the revolution—and improve the tough lives of many
working women and their children?
If that means massive intervention, in the shape of affirmative-action
programmes and across-the-board benefits for parents of all sorts, the answer is
no. To begin with, promoting people on the basis of their sex is illiberal and
unfair, and stigmatises its beneficiaries. And there are practical problems. Lengthy
periods of paid maternity leave can put firms off hiring women, which helps
explain why most Swedish women work in the public sector and Sweden has a
lower proportion of women in management than America does.
But there are plenty of cheaper, subtler ways in which governments can make life
easier for women. Welfare states were designed when most women stayed at
home. They need to change the way they operate. German schools, for instance,
close at midday. American schools shut down for two months in the summer.
These things can be changed without huge cost. Some popular American charter
schools now offer longer school days and shorter summer holidays. And, without
going to Scandinavian lengths, America could invest more in its children: it
spends a lower share of its GDP on public child-care than almost any other rich
country, and is the only rich country that refuses to provide mothers with paid
maternity leave. Barack Obama needs to measure up to his campaign rhetoric
about ""real family values"".
Still, these nagging problems should not overshadow the dramatic progress that
women have made in recent decades. During the second world war, when
America's menfolk were off at the front, the government had to summon up the
image of Rosie the Riveter, with her flexed muscle and ""We Can Do It"" slogan, to
encourage women into the workforce. Today women are marching into the
workplace in ever larger numbers and taking a sledgehammer to the remaining
glass ceilings."
143;"spring? He's going to be devastated.
I just came from Georgetown and talked to Jack et al. applied for ""early action"" —that is to be
guaranteed admittance without applying elsewhere. The decision on ""early action"" is based on grades and scores — the
most empirical measures. It is EXTREMELY difficult to be accepted EARLY at Georgetown She was deferred until the
spring — through the regular process when they will weigh all her strengths. There is never any guarantee but this is the
situation for early action.
Everyone is excited about the speech tom'w. I wish I could go but have to be here for another event at State. I've gone
back and forth with speechwriters. I know it will be terrific.
Melanne S. Verveer
Ambassador at Large for Global Women's Issues
U.S. Department of State
2201 C Street NW, Room 6805
Washington, DC 20520
Tel: (202) 647-7283
Fax: (202) 647-7288
VerveerMS@state.gov"
143;"Bartholomew
B6
Marshall, Capricia P; Verveer, Melanne S
RELEASE IN PART
B6"
143;"Thank you SO much! We will get the photo off widely.
Had a good meeting w Melinda Gates. They are ready to support our maternal and child health initiative. Your husband
touched everyone here with his Haiti plea.
We're making good progress on women's issues."
143;"Your fans are here by the hundreds and eagerly awaiting your speech on the 12th!
As you know the US has been a strong supporter of a new women's agency at the UN that would provide for an Under
Secretary General for women's issues, better coordination and effectiveness and-- consolidation of a group of smaller
entities. In bilats today, I learned that some G77 countries are wondering what's in it for them. They're not developing
countries and they're not the UK or US. Brazil may be second guessing the creation of the new agency yet this is an
agency that will benefit women everywhere. I don't know if you'll have an opportunity to say to Brazil's leader that we
hope the UN women's agency will continue to have their support. In fact Tom Shannon told me that they're really
interested in women's issues and wanted to sign a MOU with us. Sometimes there's a disconnect between NY perm reps
and their capitals
2nd, I don't know if you're still going to Chile. If you talk to Bachelet about her future, you can tell that so many govt reps
at the UN would like to see her head up the new women's agency. It's not clear if she's even interested.
Thx"
143;"I don't know if you'll be speaking to Roza Otunboyeva, the interim leader in Kyrgyzstan, but if you do, it might be
interesting to mention that you know of her commitment to microcredit. She was instrumental in bringing FINCA to
Kyrgyzstan and when you made your trip there you saw what a difference it was making to lift up women and their
families. She also was her country's head of delegation to Beijing. She was foreign minister at the time and made a strong
statement about gender equality and the transformative power of microcredit. I think she had an overseas post when you
visited Kyrgyz so I don't think you met her.
I know it's a very complicated situation there now with our use of the base in potential jeopardy, but I thought this info
might be useful in some way assuming she manages to hold on.
I'm off to Lithuania, Russia and Egypt later today."
143;"(wanted to give you some brief observations from my trip to Lithuania. First of all, their friendship with the US and
respect for you was much in evidence on all levels. Most of the cabinet turned out for the reception that the amb hosted
for me. The FM went out his way to tell me what it meant to get a call from you when he assumed his position (he's
hoping to have a few mins with you in Tallin). As far as Lith has to go, it has achieved some remarkable achievements for
Eastern Eur. They have a female president, Speaker, Finance minister and def. minister. I had a good meeting with the
President and thanked her for Lith commitment to our collective efforts in afghanistan. They run the smallest PRT and,
despite a tough economy, have done everything we've asked in terms of additional support since the surge. The meeting
with the Speaker and top women members of the parl'nt was yet another reminder of your inspiration over many years.
One of the women was at the Vienna W conf and said she's in politics today because of you. Another read about safe
birthing kits in your book and was inspired to send several thousand to Afghanistan. They are eager for more
opportunities to work together.
I came primarily to launch the new working group on gender that we and Lith are co-chairing. There was much gratitude
for our leadership with them in the Community of Democracies.
The meaning of democracy is so strong for people who had to stuggle for it more recently. They really feel this is an
important time to renew the understanding of democ, particularly after the bruising it underwent over the last several
years.
We had terrific turnout from other countries, many comments about you and references to Beijing and Iceland W conf.
(So many people told me the impact Vienna and Iceland had on them). We left our meeting with many commitments for
future concrete projects that will be undertaken. There is great hope that you will be in Krakow in July for the CD
ministerial. The Lith CD coordinator headed to Belgium the next day for an EU meeting. He told me he got a very positive
response for our gender initiative and that Ashton was particularly excited about it. The EU is locating their new gender
institute in Lithuania and they are ager for our help.
The Dutch minister who came
said the outcome of their election in June will say much about the nature of their ongoing commitment in Afg.
Lastly, I arrived shortly after the Polish tragedy. There is a very close relationship between the 2 countries and their grief
was palpable. Jolenta Kwasniewska and several other Poles came to the CD meeting. She told me that they lost so many
of their top leaders across all sectors of society, incl several top women leaders. Jolenta' foundation has been very active
in advancing women's progress in Poland as well as working in other countries."
143;"I had a good visit with her. She very much wants you to come to Egypt for the major anti-trafficking event she is doing in
December and sends you her regards.
Egypt is making good progress on women's issues: prosecuting child marriage cases, combating FGM and they're close to
passing a tough anti-trafficking law. Mrs M is the guiding force.
She and the President appreciated your call after his surgery. The most difficult part of our conversation was
We also announced our partnership with egypt for the training of. Afghan midwives at the suzanne mubarek health
center in Alexandria."
143;"I think it's Dec 10 at the Winter Palace in Luxor where you previously staved I'll eet exact date
The. Assembly passed a
good anti-trafficking law a day ago because of her leadership. I think it's a first for the region.
I saw the FM today. He said, ""Tell dear Hillary that I send hugs.""
I'm heading home finally. Its been intensive but very good. They love you here."
143;"Also is the gender entity in there -- the new women's agency Look at my UN remarks last week I have several parags on
it"
143;No, should be there
143;"pvervee
Sunday, March 14, 2010 12:29 PM
H
Re: How's the weekend gone?
On my way home. The conference was a big success. I met with Cherie Blair on the gender gap in cell phones -
technology that may be even be more tramsformative than microcredit. Phil was with GSMA for the release of their
study so we're going to figure out how we van get industry on board, etc. Cherie was involved in the GSMA study as well.
We'll both be at CGI retreat later this week where we'll raise it as well. She sends her love.
The conference referenced you over and over. Dr Mukwege personally thanked you for your leadership. Some ofthe
congolese women parliamentarians want to see if they can raise theirvoices to some good end the way the Liberians did.
We will see what we can do to help them.
DVF had an incredible awards ceremony last night. Our Haitian activist got one of the 50K prizes. DVF went on and on
about how your leadership was really responsible for the evening and what it represented.The awardees all mentioned
you. I talked to last night. I think we can get. him to fund college scolarships for afghan women.
Another awardee was one of our afghan women who's bldg schools.
I can't thank you enuf for Friday. I thought your legacy was manifested in every way.
BTW, Paul Charron was there last night and sends his best. He's such a good guy.
I'm heading home exhausted but gratified by what we've been able to do."
143;"PVerveer
Sunday, March 28, 2010 9:03 PM
Fwd: FW: Recruit Afghan women to sell war to Europeans: CIA report
Interesting.
Recruit Afghan women to sell war to Europeans: CIA report
WASHINGTON, March 27, 2010 (AFP) - A CIA expert has called for recruiting Afghan women in a public
relations bid to persuade skeptical Europeans to support the NATO-led war effort, according to a document
leaked Friday.
""Afghan women could serve as ideal messengers in humanizing"" the mission for European audiences,
particularly in France, according to the CIA analysis, posted on WikiLeaks, a whistleblower website.
The views of Afghan women would carry special weight as they could express ""their aspirations for the future,
and their fears of a Taliban victory,"" it said.
The Central Intelligence Agency declined to confirm or deny if the document was genuine. But WikiLeaks has
previously posted government and corporate documents that were later verified.
The report by a CIA expert on ""strategic communications"" and State Department analysts of public opinion
warned that popular support for the war in Europe was weak and could easily collapse, citing the recent fall of
the Dutch government over the issue.
""The tone of previous debate suggests that a spike in French or German casualties or in Afghan civilian
casualties could become a tipping point in converting passive opposition into active calls for immediate
withdrawal,"" it said.
The analysis, dated March 11, suggested public relations strategies to drum up support for the war in Germany
and France, which maintain the third and fourth largest troop deployments in Afghanistan.
""Outreach initiatives that create media opportunities for Afghan women to share their stories with French,
German, and other European women could help to overcome pervasive skepticism among women in Western
Europe toward the ISAF (International Security Assistance Force) mission,"" it said.
Public relations efforts could ""tap into acute French concern for civilians and refugees,"" the report said,
suggesting highlighting polls that show most Afghans support the presence of coalition troops.
Such an approach could stress the potential dangers facing Afghan civilians if NATO-led troops were defeated
and ""leverage French (and other European) guilt for abandoning them.""
""The prospect of the Taliban rolling back hard-won progress on girls I- education could provoke French
indignation, become a rallying point for France's largely secular public, and give voters a reason to support a
good and necessary cause despite casualties.""
For German audiences, marketing efforts should underline how Afghans are reportedly optimistic about the
NATO mission and how an international retreat would damage Germany's interests.
""For example, messages that illustrate how a defeat in Afghanistan could heighten Germany's exposure to
terrorism, opium, and refugees might help to make the war more salient to skeptics,"" it said.
The report also suggested taking advantage of President Barack Obama's popularity in France and Germany,
arguing that appeals from the US president on the importance of the allied role in the war could have a positive
effect.
The memorandum is titled: ""Afghanistan: Sustaining West European Support for the NATO-led Mission -- Why
Counting on Apathy Might Not Be Enough.""
Media Analysis and Watch Center
USSTRATCOM Foreign Media Analysis Program
SOS International Ltd.
www.sosiltd.com"
143;"Pis raise Afghan women's participation in the London meeting. I'm looking at the draft document to come out of the
London conference and there's no mention of women. I'm working on a few suggestions and going to meet shortly with
one of Miliband's colleagues.
Melanne S. Verveer
Ambassador at Large for Global Women's Issues
U.S. Department of State
2201 C Street NW, Room 6805
Washington, DC 20520
Tel: (202) 647-7283
Fax: (202) 647-7288
VerveerMS@state.gov"
143;"for having me join you for the trip. I can now add the Caucuses to the countries we've traveled to together!
You were magnificent. There is clearly much to be done in the region and I'll be following up from my end."
143;"You are scheduled to meet with the Danish Foreign Minister on Friday. The Danes are interested in partnering with the
US on a side event at the Kabul
Conference focused on Afghan women. I think this has potential and I'll raise with SRAP, but wanted you to know -- in
case it comes up in your meeting.
When I met with a couple of the Afghan women who participated in the recent peace jirga, they told me that it would
send a very strong message if a large group of women representing Afghan civil society could meet with you when you
are in Kabul for the conference. I don't know if it will be possible to arrange such a large gathering, but perhaps
something significant can be arranged.
Melanne S. Verveer
Ambassador at Large for Global Women's Issues
U.S. Department of State
2201 C Street NW, Room 6805
Washington, DC 20520
Tel: (202) 647-7283
Fax: (202) 647-7288
VerveerMS@state.gov"
143;"Just met with Fr Gudziak. He will come back to Kyiv for your visit!
Also John Tefft saw him in Lviv. He is so grateful for the strong support you have delivered.
Sent via BlackBerry from T-Mobile"
143;"I know you're meeting with Peggy tom'w.
Melanne S. Verveer
Ambassador at Large for Global Women's Issues
U.S. Department of State
2201 C Street NW, Room 6805
Washington, DC 20520
Tel: (202) 647-7283
Fax: (202) 647-7288
VerveerMS@state.gov"
143;"How Come we havent?
This is what we are up against.
Betrayed
They said we were there to save Afghanistan's women. So how
come we haven't?
BY VALERIE M. HUDSON, PATRICIA LEIDL I MAY 10, 2010
One day in November 2009, in Helmand province's capital of Lashkar Gah, a group of Afghan widows and divorcees met
with Patricia, who had been commissioned to write a series of success stories for the U.S. Agency for International
Development (USAID). All the women were in their 20s, 30s, and 40s but looked to be in their 60s. Until very recently,
none of them could work because they possessed no marketable skills, could neither read nor write, and were at risk of
being killed if they left their homes. A number of women said that, before the program -- which focused on tailoring and
basic literacy -- their children used to weep at night from hunger.
COMMENTS (22) SHARE:
Twitter
Reddit
Buzz
EMore...
As Patricia prepared to leave, the women fluttered around her like moths, touching her sleeves and speaking all at once.
'What are they saying?"" Pat asked the young Pashto-speaking interpreter. ""They are telling you to go back to your
country and to ask your people not to abandon them. The women of Afghanistan don't want you to leave. They will quite
literally die if the Taliban return,"" she said.
In a recent question-and-answer period at one of our universities, Brigham Young, a student asked Gen. David Petraeus
whether anyone thought to ask the women of Afghanistan how they felt about U.S. hopes to incorporate ""reformed""
Taliban into governance structures as the Americans leave.
Carefully avoiding the word ""women,"" the general assured the questioning student that only ""moderate"" Taliban would be
eligible for such rehabilitation. Left unaddressed was the definition of ""moderate,"" which clearly depends on where you sit:
If you sit in a burqa, there is no such thing as a ""moderate"" Taliban.
Petraeus might find it easy now to sidestep the question of what will happen to Afghanistan's women once the ""moderate""
Taliban come back, but it's likely to haunt him for a long time. Without the security of women there is no security -- and
until we've done more to protect it, we have a moral and practical obligation to stay in Afghanistan.
In 2001, George W. Bush's administration interpreted the first post-invasion photos of Afghan girls heading to school and
of Afghan women unveiling their faces as tangible evidence that conditions were improving in that benighted land. A few
months after the invasion, in his 2002 State of the Union address, Bush announced, ""The last time we met in this
chamber, the mothers and daughters of Afghanistan were captives in their own homes, forbidden from working or going to
school. Today women are free and are part of Afghanistan's new government.""
The Americans strong-armed a handful of women into the loya jirga that then drafted the Afghan Constitution. They
strong-armed a quota for women in the Afghan national legislature -- something that even American women are not
treated to. U.S. troops built schools for girls and pushed for women to be included in the local shuras, and USAID ripped a
page from Greg Mortenson's Three Cups of Tea and facilitated new training and educational opportunities for women.
But the current administration, despite its female secretary of State and its new Office of Global Women's Issues, appears
to be ditching the women of Afghanistan like a blind date gone bad. You have to go back 10 months to find any sustained
rhetoric from President Barack Obama about the importance of assuring the security of women in Afghanistan. Since
then, and especially since last year's Afghan election, those fine words from a sitting president have all but disappeared.
Many of the fine actions are gone, too. Push local shuras into including women in 2002? Yes. Push local shuras into
including women in 2010? Forget it.
It's not difficult to understand why. Afghanistan is in crisis. The cynical policies that characterized the early to mid-stages
of the occupation have come home to roost. President Hamid Karzai and his rogue's gallery of kleptocrats, human rights
abusers, and drug lords are hanging onto power even as Karzai declares open season on the United Nations by accusing
senior bureaucrats of organizing the widespread voter fraud that consolidated his own hold on power.
In the meantime, women have taken a back seat to realpolitik and the exigencies of a coalition exit strategy. But their
suffering is real, as Afghanistan's poverty and chaos affect women possibly most of all. Matemal mortality in Afghanistan
still makes the world's top three list, nine years after the U.S. invasion, resulting in a life expectancy for women of 46. In
the countryside, Taliban zealots spray acid into girls' faces for going to school -- and only 27 percent of them do so in the
first place. According to a recent survey by the U.N. Development Fund for Women, 87 percent of Afghan women report
being beaten on a regular basis.
In July of last year, the U.N. Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) issued a report that represents the most stinging
official condemnation of the Karzai administration's abysmal track record on women to date. The report concluded, ""The
current reality is that ... women are denied their most fundamental human rights and risk further violence in the course of
seeking justice for crimes perpetrated against them."" Last year Karzai pardoned well-connected political thugs who --
before witnesses -- gang-raped a woman with a bayonet. Her husband, who had battled for redress, was assassinated
soon thereafter. Women who dare to speak out against the widespread trampling of their rights face almost certain death
while their murderers face 100 percent impunity.
For the warlords and mujahideen that make up the upper echelons of the Karzai government, the issue of gender equality
was always an unwanted appendage to U.S. involvement -- but one that could easily be dispensed with through the
deployment of flowery speeches and the token appointment of a lone female minister to the Ministry of Women's Affairs.
Indeed, just before his recent ""election,"" Karzai felt secure enough to sign into law a series of repressive measures
designed to repeal what minimal gains women have made since the Taliban ouster.
Although eventually forced to back down over legislation that allows Shiite husbands to rape their wives, Karzai
successfully signed into law other legislation that denies or severely limits women's rights to inherit, divorce, or have
guardianship of their own children. The Shiite Personal Status Law also legalizes forced marriage and the rape of minors.
It allows men to exert almost total control over female relatives and offers them the power to prohibit women's access to
work, education, and health care by denying them the right to leave their homes except for ""legitimate"" purposes. Even
Karzai's own wife -- a doctor whose skills are desperately needed -- is strictly sequestered. And if this sounds bad, just
wait until the Americans leave.
This is not just about women. Gender inequality not only affects girls and women, but boys and men. In Afghanistan,
because women are rarely able to leave the house, very young boys are often forced to carry an unwarranted amount of
financial responsibility, something that limits their prospects as well.
Nor is it even just about Afghanistan. As Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said in March, ""The subjugation of women is a
threat to the national security of the United States."" On a geopolitical level, Valerie's research has found that states with
higher levels of violence against women are also less peaceful internationally. Indeed, violence against women is a better
predictor of bellicosity than level of democracy, level of wealth, or presence of Islamic civilization. In a 2010 study, Valerie,
along with Brad Thayer, also found high levels of gender inequality to be a strong aggravating factor in the development of
Islamic suicide terrorism.
So, given the desperate need of Afghanistan's women and the serious consequences worldwide, why aren't we doing
more to help? One reason is the fallacious notion, common among coalition members, that Afghan ""culture"" does not
allow for gender equality and that forcing the issue will undermine Western interests. Pat heard this openly from one
coalition representative, who prefers to remain anonymous: 'There is no point in pushing gender equality. It will only
alienate them [Afghans]."" Of course, ""them"" here refers only to men.
But decision-makers forget that culture is not fixed, but is highly mutable and dynamic. More than 30 years ago, Afghan
women were attending universities, teaching, working as doctors, nurses, and professors. Far from being a black hole of
gender apartheid, Afghanistan, though impoverished, was more progressive than many of its Muslim neighbors.
Furthermore, many young Afghans are open to new ways of doing things. In 2009, hundreds of Afghan men and women
bravely stood together in Kabul to protest Karzai's support for a new and oppressive Shiite family law. If Americans
assume that all Afghan men are Neanderthals incapable of sympathizing with the plight of their sisters, they are wrong.
Another, more unmentionable reason may be the chauvinism that permeates Western military culture. U.S. military life,
despite increasing female recruitment and even ""female engagement teams,"" remains a bastion of masculinity, with little
sensitivity toward questions of female rights. For military leadership and recruits alike, immured as they are in an almost
exclusively male world, the complete absence of women from Afghanistan's streets and villages elicited no comment from
the Marines who surrounded Pat, though she as a woman noticed it immediately.
And the ready availability of pornography on U.S. bases, coupled with seamier depictions of life in the West, not only
damages prospects for gender equality but by extension, Western interests. As one young, well-educated 24-year-old
Afghan male pointed out, ""Your culture has no respect for women at all. Look at your pornography and the way you exploit
women in ways that we can't even imagine. Do you call that progress?"" Added another Afghan USAID programmer
working in Gardez, a man in his 50s who is the father of three girls, ""It would be better for the coalition if they could figure
out a way to limit this kind of material.""
We can do better -- much better.
The Obama administration must instill in all military personnel and senior diplomats the necessity of fully protecting
women's rights. Key to that is educating them about how gender equality furthers Western interests and security.
The military should spend less time courting ""moderate"" Taliban and more time showing Afghan community leaders how
gender equality -- including female access to family planning methods -- will result in healthier families, lower maternal
and child death rates, poverty alleviation, and greater self-determination. Gender should be included as a component in all
governance training and should be placed front and center in the upcoming ""peace jirga"" that will include the Taliban.
Indeed, let half of the negotiating team representing the government and the coalition be female: yes, a full 50 percent.
Women must also be represented in the government. As Melanne Verveer, U.S. ambassador at large for global women's
issues, noted last summer, speaking of female politicians in Afghanistan, ""There is only one minister in the cabinet, and
she is powerless. There is a low percentage of women in the civil service. There is only one female governor, in
Bamiyan."" Obama must insist on important changes for women before we leave and make subsequent aid contingent
upon maintenance of a strong presence for women in the Afghan government.
Better yet, the coalition needs to support ""regime change"" through the building of democratic institutions that will groom a
moderate, educated middle class of young women and men to eventually take over. Over two-thirds of the Afghan
population is under the age of 25, which is either a real opportunity for social change -- if they are educated and given a
chance to shape their society in a progressive way -- or a major obstacle, if they find themselves without jobs, unable to
marry, and burdened with retrograde attitudes of what it means to be male and female.
We must hold Afghanistan responsible for its treaty obligations under the U.N. Convention on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women (CEDAVV) and U.N. Security Council Resolution 1325 on women, peace, and
security. Afghanistan signed CEDAW without reservations (the United States interestingly, has not), and that means that it
has committed to passing whatever legislation is necessary to implement the wide-ranging principles of gender equality
enshrined in that treaty. This includes taking measures to ensure that women enjoy the same basic human rights and
fundamental freedoms as men, having in place legal and judicial procedures to protect the rights of women, taking
measures to eliminate sexist discrimination, and lastly, submitting national reports every four years to a U.N. advisory
group of international experts, the CEDAW Committee, to ensure transparency on what measures the country has taken
to implement the treaty's provisions.
Unanimously adopted in 2000, UNSC 1325 marked the first time the Security Council recognized the disproportionate and
unique impact of armed conflict on women and stressed the importance of their equal and full participation as active
agents in peace and security.
Needless to say, women do not currently enjoy the same fundamental freedoms as men, and indeed, with the passing of
the Shiite family law, many are worse off than they were before.
To change this, the coalition needs to stay in Afghanistan. Withdrawing at this critical juncture would doom Afghanistan
and the entire region to instability and effectively consign one half of the population to premature death and an existence
not fit for animals.
We are creating a shameful American tradition of leaving women no better off (Afghanistan) -- or even much worse off
(Iraq) -- than before U.S. troops intervened. On the basis of America's track record, women around the world should have
no faith that U.S. soldiers will improve their security. Despite Clinton's remarks on the link between gender equality and
security, on the ground Americans act as if women's well-being, in the end, is not more than peripherally related to the
issue of peace. As we have seen, this view could not be more wrong. Verveer's benchmarks concerning Afghanistan are
the right ones: ""Progress in Afghanistan must be measured not just in military terms, but also in terms of social, political,
and economic participation of women in rebuilding Afghanistan and in the safeguarding of their human rights.""
American women are right to ask why we are sending their sons and daughters to fight and die so that Afghan women can
continue to be treated like an inferior subspecies of humanity. When you break faith with Afghan women, you break faith
with American women. You also break faith with your reasons for being there in the first place.
Save bio when you subscribe to FP.
Majid Saeedi/Getty Image"
143;Transcript of Malinowski's meeting with Karzai attached.
143;FYI -- Karl and Zakhilwal have gone to Islamabad to try to close the deal.
143;Fyi
143;"The writer is someone who has worked with Afghan women in developing small businesses in Afghanistan and is doing a
book about the experience.
She went back to Afghanistan for the conference that women had over the weekend and wrote the article that follows
for today's Daily Beast.
Soraya mentioned here is one of our Women of Courage. Gayle (the writer) told me in a separate email that De Mistura
was very sympathetic and said they should be consulted, that the current documents are working documents and he
pledged that the women would be more inovled in the follow up. He also told them that he was very impressed that
they had organized themselves in this 2-day conference to be able to play a more effective role. Zakhilwal was gracious,
but said they were adequately consulted. So it goes.
Secretary Clinton may be one of the highest-profile attendees at Tuesday's Kabul Conference, but
Afghan women fear their opinions won't be heard—and they worry new deals with fighters will roll
back their hard-fought rights.
As Hillary Clinton prepares to attend Tuesday's Kabul Conference, Afghan women are delivering a plain message to
government and international officials: Women's voices should be heard.
""We have to be honest. With respect to the Kabul Conference, we have not been consulted,"" said Soraya Pakzad, founder
of a women's shelter in the western Afghan city of Herat. Her comment came during an unusually heated question-and-
answer session with Afghan Finance Minister Omar Zakhilwal and United Nations representative Staffan de
Mistura marking the end of a two-day women's conference. ""We want to be involved in policy-making. We don't want our
presence to be purely symbolic.""
""Women's rights and achievements should not be compromised in any peace negotiations or
accords.""
The Kabul Conference is, in part, built on symbolism. A follow-up to January's London Conference, the gathering marks
the first time Afghanistan has played host to its international donors, a decision that is intended to showcase the transition
from foreign to Afghan ownership of national priorities. More than 65 international delegations are expected to descend
upon the Afghan capital, which is already enduring security crackdowns and traffic gridlock. Workers could be seen
Sunday painting curbs and planting flowers in advance of the foreigners' arrival.
Discussions will center around five topics, including economic development, agriculture, governance, and security. The
goal of the half-day event is to establish a framework for Afghan leadership in the setting—and execution—of the
country's political and economic direction.
Although it remains to be seen how quickly the Afghan govemment, long under-resourced and beset by allegations of
corruption, will be able to take the reins from its international donors, there is no question that Afghan ownership is the
direction in which things are moving, on the political, economic, and security fronts. And that is precisely why women feel
the stakes for this week's meeting are so high, particularly in light of new deals to empower local militias that might
threaten women's rights.
""After the Kabul Conference, no one knows what else could be on the agenda apart from war escalations and
negotiations,"" said Orzala Ashraf, an Afghan human rights activist. ""This is very important for us, to get a serious and
honest commitment from our government in the presence of all witnesses from the world that our voices will not be
silenced.""
Ashraf and a number of other women's advocates view Tuesday's talks are their last, best shot at speaking out about their
concerns, with help from European and American officials who have been working hard to help them win a seat at the
table. In another show of support, Secretary Clinton and Danish Foreign Minister Lene Espersen will meet Tuesday
morning with a group of women leaders.
Regardless of this high-profile backing, many women say they have little faith in the process to produce anything aside
from more paper and more unkept promises.
""Women are very tired of all these conferences; the government is going to have to show commitments,"" said Selay
Ghaffar, an Afghan Women's Network board member. ""We want things to change.""
And it remains unclear how many Afghans outside Kabul, men or women, are paying attention to yet another gathering to
discuss their future.
""Women in the provinces don't even know about this,"" said Zainab, a young math teacher from Helmand province. ""I
would say 60 percent of women have no idea this is going on.""
Others say the presence of one or two women at the Kabul Conference isn't enough to make a difference. And they say
they fear the recent move from NATO to empower local militias to fight the Taliban, particularly in southern Afghanistan.
""This is very dangerous,"" said Shahida Hussain, a human rights advocate from Kandahar who worked as a community
organizer during the Taliban years. ""We had militias during the communist years and Afghanistan was destroyed. We fear
war again.""
Women leaders say that they want peace and are glad to welcome back former fighters, but only if they respect women's
constitutional guarantee to equal protections under the law.
""Women should be a constituent part of all bodies outlined in the Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration Plan,"" said the
women in a statement at the end of their meeting. ""Women's rights and achievements should not be compromised in any
peace negotiations or accords.""
In the meantime, women continue to fight for a voice as Tuesday approaches. After a weeklong flurry of conference calls,
embassy meetings, and lunchtime gatherings, two women aside from government ministers are now slated to speak.
And in a small victory for women, international officials agreed with Pakzad's assessment before pledging that women
would be more involved going forward.
""I agree, you were not consulted,"" said da Mistura, appearing to contradict the Afghan finance minister, who only a few
moments earlier had said that women's views had and would be included. ""As usual, we have been paying lip service to
you and we are all at fault for that.""
Gayle Tzemach Lemmon covered presidential politics as a producer at ABC News in Washington. Since 2005, she has
been reporting on women entrepreneurs starting small and medium-sized businesses in post-conflict economies such as
Afghanistan, Bosnia and Rwanda. She is currently working on a book scheduled for 2010 publication by HarperCollins
about a young Afghan entrepreneur whose business supported her family and community during the Taliban years."
143;"Thank you for all you did on behalf of the Afghan women on your whirlwind visit. Emails of gratitude to you are pouring
in from Afghanistan. Many of the women listened to your intervention and commented on that as well as your small
meeting.
Yesterday, I had to speak at an event with the Congressional Women's Caucus on Maternal Health in Afghanistan. I said
that as we were meeting in the Cannon Caucus Room , you were making a major maternal health announcement in
Afghanistan. The women Members were overjoyed as were all the health advocates.
This article from the Guardian was sent to me by a UK parliamentarian who intends to echo your remarks. Also, Andrea
Mitchell did a great piece on your meeting with the women on NBC.
> Hillary Clinton vows to defend rights of Afghan women
> US secretary of state tells foreign ministers meeting in Kabul women 'will not be sacrificed' in any peace deal with the
Taliban
> Jon Boone in Kabul
> Wednesday July 21 2010
> The Guardian
> http://mvw.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/jul/20/hillary-clinton-afghan-women-taliban
> Jon Boone
> Hillary Clinton today promised that any peace deal with the ultra-conservative Taliban movement would not come at the
cost of the rights of Afghan women.
> The US secretary of state told a conference of the world's foreign ministers that women in the country ""will not be
sacrificed"" and announced a number of initiatives to improve their situation.
> Her intervention came when many diplomats assume that any deal with hardline insurgents will inevitably involve
compromises that would have been unthinkable nine years ago, when the US-led invasion of Afghanistan was in part
justified by the desire to emancipate Afghan women.
> But in a meeting with leading Afghan women today Clinton told them that any deal ""can't come at the cost of women and
women's lives"".
> ""We are aware of the concerns that many of you have expressed about the reconciliation process and we understand
why you would have those concerns,"" Clinton told them.
> Anxious to put the issue on the agenda of her fellow foreign ministers, she told the conference that women and civil
society groups ""will be essential to this country's success.""
> ""If these groups are fully empowered to help build a just and lasting peace, they will help do so,"" she said. ""If they are
silenced and pushed to the margins of Afghan society, the prospects for peace and justice will be subverted.""
> She also announced extra US funding for projects to improve maternal and child health, including one scheme that will
use mullahs to encourage women to make use of clinics. In rural Afghan society, where they are often not allowed to
leave the house without their husband's permission, women are sometimes discouraged from seeking medical care.
> The final conference communique recognised ""the centrality of women's rights to the future of Afghanistan"".
> Earlier this month, a report by Human Rights Watch said the Afghan government was already doing little to protect
women and that their rights should be a priority in any political agreement with the Taliban.
> The organisation said in areas under the control of militants, women suffer from violence and intimidation while girls'
schools and female activists are attacked. The report identified one case where a female civil servant had to quit her job
after receiving a ""night letter"" from insurgents threatening to kill her.
> If you have any questions about this email, please contact the guardian.co.uk user help desk:
userhelpguardian.co.uk.
Get a new e-mail account with Hotmail - Free. Sign-up now. ="
143;"This is from Fr. Borys Gudziak, the wonderful priest you met in Lviv. He gave you a tour of the Cathedral and you had a
wonderful chat with him at the time. Since then, much progress has been made there. He became head of the new
Ukrainian Catholic University and has really come in to his own as a respected leader and scholar.
Unfortunately, his situation and that of the Catholic community and academic freedom has come under siege since
Yanokovich became president. I have a series of emails from the US Ukrainian community, in addition to this email
directly from Gudziak, They are alarmed about developments. I've been in touch with John Tefft and sent him everything.
He is aware of recent events.
I will make a folder of the correspondence for you since the community here and in Ukraine sees you as their champion.
This is not a good turn of events."
143;The girls' team will deliver!
143;"PVerveer
Thursday, September 2, 2010 10:30 PM
H
Fwd: good luck- re middle east
from Inez McCormack in Belfast
B6"
143;"PVerveer
Wednesday, November 17, 2010 11:55 PM
Thank you!
I can't believe that the conspiracy around me worked! I was so mindful of your murderous schedule today
that it never even occurred to me that you would tack on yet one more thing.
Your showing up was a fabulous surprise, so emblematic of your generosity it so many ways and a wonderful reminder of
the cause that you started me on and grew over these almost 20 years.
Many thanks.
Should you talk to the new Dutch FM in Lisbon, you might thank him for their work on 1325. They are helping other
countries, including in Afghanistan and we hope that they will continue in the new govt.
Good travels and heartfelt thanks.
Melanne"
143;Thank you, Surprised
143;"En route back from India and China. It was good I went to Chennai where I had a full schedule including meeting with
another self-help group like SEWA (500 poor women showed up) It took me back to our trips. Also met with the local
elected village council -- remarkable group of empowered women. I took both experiences to our strategic dialogue
meeting in Delhi where we made excellent progress. We also met with the ""cookstove"" officials to give them heads up
about your initiative (told Roemer too). SEWA will be on stage with you at CGI!
Other good meetings with SEWA on markets, Afghanistan, and solar lanterns. Vital Voices conf was a huge succss. I
couldn't stay for much but your video was well received, Hormats was terrific (he's becoming a rock star with women!)
And F Secretary Rao did a nice job.
Our China experience provided a lot of insights and we will do a short strategy paper for you. We moved the women's
leadership forum forward. Suifficeth to say, there are so many opportunities that I believe we should be taking
advantage of, (which we are not doing) including in the economics track. The women there are growing in power and
influence. More later.
I'll see you for the NY marathon!"
143;I thought you'd like to see Vjosa's reaction tp your visit to Kosovo.
143;This is so discouraging.
143;"Verveer, Melanne S <VerveerMS@state.gov>
Friday, December 17, 2010 3:04 PM
New Development
B1
1.4(D)
I have alerted Moriarty and Blake.
Melanne S. Verveer
Ambassador at Large for Global Women's Issues U.S. Department of State
2201 C Street NW, Room 6805
Washington, DC 20520
Tel: (202) 647-7283
Fax: (202) 647-7288
VerveerMS@state.gov"
143;"PVerveer
Saturday, December 18, 2010 1:22 PM
child marriage defeat
The defeat of the Child Marriage bill, I fear, is a harbinger of what's to come. After passing the Senate unanimously, there
was every expectation that it would fly through the House on suspension. How this too became an abortion issue is truly
distressing. We have our work more than cut out for us.
On another note, i ran into Ray and Shaista the other night. They were recently in Pakistan and stayed with Zardari the
whole time. It might make sense for someone to brief Ray. Zardari considers him his informal ambassador to the US.
z..L ;; ;•=r-i e forc,; e
Posted: i7 Dec 2010 03:08 PM PS'
Incoming House Foreign Affairs chairwoman ileana Ros-Lehtinen. (R-FL) defeated a bill Thursday evening that
would have committed the United States to combating forced child marriages abroad, by invoking concerns about
the legislation's cost and that funds could be uses to finance abortions. The episode highlights the tough road that
the °barna administration will face in advancing its women's rights and foreign aid agenda during the next
Congressional session.
Non-governmental organizations, women's rights advocates, and. lawmakers from both parties spent years
developing and lobbying for the ""International Protecting Girls by Preventing Child Marriage Act of 2010,"" which
the House failed to pass in a vote Thursday. The bill failed even though 241 Congressmen voted, for it and only 166
voted against, because House Speaker Nancy Petosi (D-CA) brought it up under ""suspension of the rules."" This
procedure has the advantage of not allowing any amendments or changes to the bill, but carries the disadvantage of
requiring two-thirds of the. votes for passage.
; Even still, supporters in both parties fully expected the bill to garner the 290 votes needed -- right up until the bill.
failed. After all, it passed the Senate unanimously Dee. i with the co-sponsorship of several Republicans. including
Appropriations Committee ranking Republican Thad Cochran (R-MS), Foreign Relations Committee member
Roger ‘Vick-er (P.-MS), and human rights advocate Sam Brownback (R-KS).
if passed, the bill would have authorized the president to provide assistance ""to prevent the incidence of child
marriage in developing countries through the promotion of educational, health, economic, social, and legal
empowerment of girls and women."" It would have also mandated that the administration develop a multi-year
strategy on the issue and that the State Department include the incidence of forced child marriage during its annual
evaluation of countries' human rights practices.
So what happened? Ros-Lehtinen first argued that the bill was simply unaffordable. In a Dec. i6""
she objected to the Post of the bill, which would be Si.08 million over five years, and criticized it for not
providing an accounting of how much the U.S. was already spending on this (Alba The '
said the bill would authorize $1o8 million, but would only require $67 million in outlays from fiscal years 2011 to
2015.
Ros-Lehtinen introduced her own version of the bill, which she said would only cost $1 million. But in a fact sheet
gDF.), organizations supporting the original legislation said that Ros-Lehtinen's bill removed the implementation
procedures that gave the legislation teeth. ""Without such activities, the bill becomes merely a strategy with no actual
implementation. And without implementation of a strategy, the bill will have an extraordinarily limited impact,""
they wrote.
Regardless, the supporters still thought the bill would pass because House Republican leadership had not come out
against it. But about one hour before the vote, every Republican House office received a message on the bill
from GOP leadership, known as a Whip Alert, saying that leadership Nyould vote ""no"" on the bill and encouraging all
Republicans do the same. The last line on the alert particularly shocked the supporters.
""There are also concerns that funding will be directed to NGOs that promote and perform abortion and efforts to
combat child marriage could be usurped as a way to overturn pro-life laws,"" the alert read.
The bill doesn't contain any funding for abortion activities and federal funding for abortion activities is already
; prohibited by what's known as the almenè"" which has been boiler plate language in appropriations
bills since 1973.
Invoking the abortion issue sent the bill's supporters reeling. They believed that it was little more than a stunt,
considering that Republican pro-life senators had carefully reviewed the legislation and concluded it would not have
an impact on the abortion issue.
Rep. Stephen LaTourrette (R-OH) - the Republican leadership for invoking the abortion issue to defeat
the forced child marriage act in a floor speech .Friday morning.
""Yesterday I was on the floor and I was a co-sponsor with [on] a piece of legislation with [Rep. Betty McCollum
(D-MN)] that would have moved money, no new money, would have moved money so that societies that are
coercing young girls into marriage... we could make sure that they stay in school so they're not forced into marriage
at the age of 12 and 13,"" LaTourette said. ""Ail of a sudden there was a fiscal argument. When that didn't work people
had to add an abortion element to it. This is a partisan place. I'm a Republican. I'm glad we beat their butt in the
election, but there comes a time when, enough is enough.""
But it was too late for LaTourette and other Republicans who had fought hard for the bill, including Aaron Schoch,
(R-11). The bill is even less likely to pass next year, when the GOP will control the House and Ros-Lehtinen will
control the Foreign Affairs committee.
The main author of the bill was Senate Majority Whip Dick Durbin (D-IL), who was incensed when the bill failed
in the House.
-The action on the House floor stopping the Child 'Marriage bill tonight will endanger the lives of millions of women.
and girls around the world,"" Durbin said in a Thursday statement. ""These.voung girls, enslaved in marriage, will be
brutalized and many will die when their young bodies are torn apart while giving birth. Those who voted to continue
this barbaric practice brought shame to Capitol Hill.""
For the NGO and women's advocacy community, the implications of this defeat extend much further than just this
bill. They also saw Republicans invoke the abortion issue when objecting to the International Violence Against
Women Act and expect the new Congress to push for reinstatement of the ""Mexico City Policy,"" which would
prevent federal funding for any organizations that even discuss abortion.
""Any time a health bill that has to do with women and girls comes to the House floor, we're going to see a debate
like the one we just saw,"" said one advocacy leader who supported the bill. ""It's hard to imagine how any
development bills are going to pass in this environment.""
The protection of women and girls is a major focus of Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, who promised to elevate
the issue Thursday when rolling out the State Department's Quadrennial Diplomacy and Development Review. She
has said that forced child marriage is ""a clear and unacceptable violation of human rights"", and that ""the
Department of State categorically denounces all cases of child marriage as child abuse"".
State's Ambassador at Large for Global Women's Issues Melanne Verveer has worked hard on the issue behind
the scenes. But at the eleventh hour, when the going got tough, the bill's supporters said that the administration was
nowhere to be found. In October, the White House decided to waive all penalties under the Child Soldiers
Prevention Act, another Durbin led bill that the NCO community supports.
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) estimates that 6o million girls in developing countries now between the
ages of 20 and 24 were married before they reached 18. The Population Council,
reproductive and child health, estimates that the number will increase by too million over the next decade if current
trends continue.
!
One of the two biggest problems identified in the Afghanistan-Pakistan Strategy Review released Thursday (?• :) is
the Pakistani militasy's failure to crack down on some of the terrorist groups using Pakistan's tribal areas as a safe
- haven from which to launch attacks across the border into Afghanistan.
Pakistan • a major offensive, involving approximately go,000 troops, against extremists in South
Waziristan in October 2009, and its military has also undertaken efforts to stamp out militants in other border
areas. However, the military has yet to launch offensive military operations in North Waziristan, where insurgent
groups wreaking havoc in Afghanistan reside.
Pakistan's envoy in Washington, Ambassador Husain Haggai* reacted to the report by saying that Pakistan will
engage isla.mist groups in North Waziristan, including the •Hartgani network (no relation), but only when there is
sufficient support in all areas of Pakistan's government for the effort, and not until they are confident that the
mission can be completed effectively.
""Pakistan has made it very clear that we are fighting terrorists because they are a threat to our own existence as a
modern democratic nation. We will fight all groups in all parts of our country,"" Haqqani said in an exclusive
interview with The Cable. ""But we will follow timelines that suit our own capabilities and can lead to success.""
Haqqani said that the Pakistani army, which has taken the fight to six out of the seven regions inside Pakistan in
which domestic militant groups operate and suffered thousands of casualties in the process, is simply not in a
position to expand its war on the extremists now.
""Right now, it's only a question of operational capability and readiness. Our armed forces have been engaged in
dealing with flood relief work,"" he said. ""We have to see what resources we will allocate in which part of the country,
and those rather than any political factors are responsible for any waiting period.""
He also noted that ""there is a fragile consensus in Pakistan in favor of military action against regional elements,""
and that Pakistan's government has no choice but to make the decision to attack North Waziristan groups on a
timeline that prioritized Pakistani considerations over American ones.
""Sometimes it's easy for our allies to tell us what to do and for us to tell our allies what to do. But everyone makes
decisions based on their own perceptions and analysis of on ground realities,"" Haqqani said.
In several discussions with other Pakistani officials, an even more complicated picture of the Pakistani position on
attacking groups in North Waziristan emerges. The Pakistanis largely believe that the U.S. government is being
unrealistic in terms of the timelines it wants for cracking down on terrorist safe havens along the Afghanistan-
Pakistan border, which have existed for decades.
, ""There will always be a gap between our two countries because the Americans want things done quickly and done
their way,"" another Pakistani government official said.
; A third senior Pakistani official said that many Pakistanis feel that the ()barna administration is placing too much of
the blame on Pakistan for the lank of progress in the 'U.S.-led war in Afghanistan.
'The U.S. keeps telling Pakistan to do more, but Pakistan keeps telling the U.S. to do more on certain questions such
as speeding up building up of Afghan army, establishing a real process toward reconciliation, and providing
Pakistan the means for large scale operations,"" the official said.
The United States has provided Pakistan with several billions of dollars in military and economic aid to support its
war against domestic insurgents. But many in the Pakistani government have criticized what they say characterize
as the slow arrival of these funds, which they say are in any case too small to address Pakistan's severe problems.
""It's very simplistic to measure success in amount of assistance provided to Pakistan,"" one Pakistani official said.
In remarks delivered during the rollout of the strateu review Thursday, President Obama was diplomatic when
discussing his administration's ongoing drive to push Pakistan to do more in North Waziristan.
""Increasingly, the Pakistani government recognizes that terrorist networks in its border regions are a threat to all
our countries, especially Pakistan. We've welcomed major Pakistani offensives in the tribal regions. We will
continue to help strengthen Pakistanis' capacity to root out terrorists,"" said Obama. ""Nevertheless, progress has not
come fast enough. So we will continue to insist to Pakistani leaders that terrorist safe havens within their borders
must be dealt with.""
Undersecretary of Defense for Policy Michele Flournoy acknowledged in an interview the same day that there
was more work to be done on the relationship before the Pakistanis were willing to fully support the U.S. and
NATO-led mission in Afghanistan.
""Given the ups and downs of our historical relationship with Pakistan, they fear our abandonment,"" she said. ""Their
calculus is very much affected by the long-term commitment they feel from us and in working in a strategic
partnership.""
The White House recognizes that its efforts have fallen short so far. ""The bottom line is that Pakistan is a country
where we have little influence, little access and little credibility,"" one of Obama's aides to■..-:), The New York Times.
The administration's official line, therefore, is to agree with the Pakistani government and express sensitivity to its
claim that they simply can't expand their war against extremists at this time.
""We would like them to move tomorrow, we would like them to take out these people tomorrow,"" the new U.S.
Ambassador to Pakistan Cameron Munter. ""But we understand they're telling us honestly about the capacity of
their military, and when they are able, we are convinced they will move in.""
But for many in Washington, the open-ended delay in Pakistan.s promise to expand military operations into North.
Waziristan represents a strategic choice, and is not just a result of the military's operational limitations. But
whatever Pakistan's reasons, the delay doesn't inspire confidence that the Obama administration can meet its
timelines for making progress in Afghanistan.
""Pakistan, meanwhile, iS hedging its bets, supporting proxy actors like the Quetta Shura Taliban and Haos
iani
Network that might counter Indian interests in Kabul after the United States and its allies eventually withdraw,""
Andrew Extnn of the Center for a New American Security. 'The insurgent sanctuaries in Pakistan are one of
the two Achilles heels in the NATO strategy.""
‘0 tt
""
Posted: 17 Dec iOO C 4:42 AM PST
In a rare instance of bipartisanship, the House of Representatives moved to pass a resolution Friday honoring the
life and work of the recently departed Ambassador Richard Holbrooke.
The resolution C, was sponsored by outgoing House Appropriations State and Foreign Ops
Subcommittee chairwoman Nita Lowey (D-NY), and cosponsored by incoming House Foreign Affairs chairwoman
Ileana Ros-Lehtinen (R-FL), Howard Berman (D-CA), and Mike Turner (R-OH). The bill is ""a concurrent
resolution honoring the exceptional achievements of Ambassador Richard Holbrooke and recognizing the
significant contributions he has made to United States national security, humanitarian causes and peaceful
resolutions of international conflict.""
""The passing of Ambassador Holbrooke on Monday, December 13th, is a great loss for the American people,"" Lowey
said in a statement. ""One of our nation's most talented diplomats, Richard Holbrooke possessed a fierce
determination and unsurpassed brilliance in advocating for American security, diplomatic, and development
interests around the world - in Southeast Asia and post-Cold War Europe, at the United Nations, and most recently
in Afghanistan and Pakistan. His exceptional accomplishments as a peace-maker, diplomat, writer, scholar,
manager and mentor will define his legacy as one of the true great foreign policy giants of our time.""
Ros-Lehtinen praised Holbrooke as ""one of the most consequential world diplomats of the last half-century,"" and
said that ""his tireless work in pursuit of United States national interests and international peace have put us all in
his debt.""
After praising his career -- which included two stints as assistant secretary of state, peace negotiator in the Balkans,
U.S. ambassador to the U.N., and service as U.S. special representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan -- Ros-
Lehtinen called for reform of the United Nations and protection of Israel within its bodies.
""In New York at the UN, [Holbrooke] did much of the heavy lifting on Congressionally-led efforts to rein in UN
spending, to make more equitable the dues paid by the United States, and to improve the standing of Israel in that
multinational body,"" she said. ""Sadly, those concerns have returned with a renewed urgency -- with the need for
fundamental reform of UN budget and the virulently anti-Israel UN Human Rights Council -- and the Congress can
only hope to have such a tenacious, principled partner in the future.""
You are subscribed to email updates from Email delivery Dowered by Google
To stop receiving these emaIls, you may .r...hs■-
.
;
Inc. 20 West Kinzie, Chicago IL USA 60610"
143;"PVerveer(
Saturday, December 18, 2010 1:29 PM
Re: child marriage defeat
I will do so. I just heard from Kristof. He said that sometimes Republican are just plain nuts. I have to really figure out a
strategy on this, GHI, etc
Also, Kristof said he was so pleased to see your influence on these issues in the QDDR.
In a message dated 12/18/2010 1:24:49 P.M. Eastern Standard Time, HDR22@clintonemail.com writes:"
143;"pverveer
Saturday, September 11, 2010 5:05 AM
As you probably heard from Bill Burns there are elements in Ukraine who keep trying to revert to the bad old days. The
SBU (who went after have now gone after soros foundation there and there are new media freedom
challenges. I hope you'll be able to meet with Yanukovych during UNGA because it's going to take steady engagement
from keeping the worst backsliding from happening. I met w Ukr arnb and Lou Debaca yesterday to establish ways we
can work with them on trafficking. Some officials have reached out to us which is good. Others are going backwards so
we want to keep the good progress they've made over the last few years going forward. The amb was grateful so we
shall see.
I'm en route to India for the Vital Voices Asia summit and for a round of rntgs on the dialogue. Will see SEWA on
cookstoves. Good luck on the Middle East.
By the way, it looks like Bacheiet will lead UNWomen. I hope that's the case. SG to announce his choice before UNGA.
Will let you know as soon as we hear definitively.
Sent via Blackberry from T-Mobile"
143;"pverveer
. Saturday September 11, 2010 2:11 PM
As you probably heard from Bill Burns there are elements in Ukraine who keep trying to revert to the bad old days. The
SBU (who went after have now gone after soros foundation there and there are new media freedom
challenges. I hope you'll be able to meet with Yanukovych during UNGA because it's going to take steady engagement
from keeping the worst backsliding from happening. I met w Ukr amb and Lou Debaca yesterday to establish ways we
can work with them on trafficking. Some officials have reached out to us which is good. Others are going backwards so
we want to keep the good progress they've made over the last few years going forward. The amb was grateful so we
shall see.
I'm en route to India for the Vital Voices Asia summit and for a round of mtgs on the dialogue. Will see SEWA on
eookstoves. Good luck on the Middle East.
By the way, it looks like Bachelet will lead UNWomen. I hope that's the case. SG to announce his choice before UNGA.
Will let you know as soon as we hear definitively.
Sent via BlackBe.rry from 1-Mobile"
143;"pvervee
Tuesday, November 9, 2010 7:23 PM
Welcome back!
Your trip looked very prodcutive from here and thanks for embracing the women's initiatives in AU and NZ. Their
governments were thrilled and the press was excellent. Lots of good work ahead.
The video for the women presidents was gratefully received. I sat with Lithuania,
Slovakia and Liberia at dinner and they all mentioned it.
You were lucky to miss election day."
143;"pverveer
Friday, November 12, 2010 11:33 AM
Fwd: for Hillary
from your friend, DVF
Original 11PriP"
143;"PVerveer
Saturday, November 13, 2010 9:59 PM
Re: for Hillary
It's a very New York crowd and very Diane style event (i.e. unconventional) Last year, it was held in one of the big
delegates' lounges at the UN and she redid all the chairs, etc in her patterns. The awards are all serious and DVF is the
moderator. Each awardee receives 50K for her ongoing work. The event bears no resemblance to a typical foreign policy
event, but if you were in NY, you could arrive for the awards and leave. I have no doubt you would be very warmly
embraced and DVF and Barry are so fond of you. I would only do it if could be easily done.
In a message dated 11/13/2010 8:51:10 P.M. Eastern Standard Time, HDR22©clintonemail.com writes:
Do you think I should do this?"
143;"PVerveer
Saturday, November 13, 2010 10:42 PM
The Hamburgs
I had a longtime postponed lunch with Betty and David. He was remembering his briefing with you at Blair House before
you were to officially become FL. He said after all the talk about what could be done for kids, he remembers telling you as
he was leaving that you could you make a real contribution on the international stage and he hoped that you would
consider doing so.
He would like to be helpful. He's done a lot of work on preventive diplomacy which he feels is too often overlooked and
extremely essential."
143;I met with
143;"Ok
I have a staffer going to Kosovo next week"
143;"I hope all the Clintons had a wonderful Xmas.
1.4(D)
B1"
143;he's meeting with Amb Moriarty tomw B5
143;"I'm off to Seattle for a conf on development and women at Microsoft and mtgs with Gates, etc.
I wanted to tell you that for your trip to Russia, we have an announcement for you to Gov of St Petersburg who is the
highest ranking female official in the Russian govt. When I saw her some months ago, she went on at length about her
respect for you and her meeting with you when you were Senator (she also met you at the Rejkavik W conf in '98) We
are going to hold a US-Russia women leaders Summit in St P in aprik It is in response to what I heard over and over
during my trip earlier this year that there is a strong desire (and need) to engage with US. Women and the women's
issues have been mostly off the agenda since the days we made it such a priority in the 90's and there is considerable
recidivism. She should be happy about the proposed summit.
Secondly, when you meet with the Lithuanian FM this week, he will invite you to the community of Democ ministerial
(end for Lith presidency) and as part of it a women and democ. Conf that will mark 10 years since the last one that was
held in the continuum you started. There are so many different needs today.
Have a good trip."
143;"B1
B5
Moriarty met with officials and yesterday separately. They are all having dinner together tonight."
143;"Verveer, Melanne S <VerveerMS@state.gov>
Friday, December 31, 2010 12:10 AM
FW: Dinner with MY and GR
Readout from the dinner tonight."
143;"Maybe more than you want to know. Obviously, TBD.
Happy New Year to all the Clintons!
1.4(D)
B1
RELEASE IN PART
B1,1.4(D)"
143;"You were so terrific at the UN. The statements of gratitude are pouring in. I will take your message to Denmark. The
Nordics will be ecstatic.
Last night at Avon, I got many messages for you from people who want to be helpful, particularly from Anna Quinlan and
Patrick Dempsey. I'm hoping to get more $ from Avon to fund VAW grants. We are inundated with requests. Reese
Witherspoon will go to Russia next year for our women's summit. She's popular there so would be good. Nothing much
has happened vis a vis Russian women and US engagement since your efforts in the 90's so we are attempting to restart
are relationship with them .They been going backwards in terms of progress.
I'm attaching the email I sent Jake and Kurt on the NZ and Australian initiatives.
Have a good trip."
143;You'll love this. Her asylum is still up in the air.
143;"Verveer, Melanne S <VerveerMS@state.gov>
Monday, December 6, 2010 3:02 AM
Fw:
1.4(D)
B1
Just when we thought thing had calmed down...."
143;"Verveer, Melanne S <VerveerMS@state.gov>
Monday, December 6, 2010 6:01 AM
More
1.4(D)
B1"
143;"Verveer, Melanne S <VerveerMS©state.gov>
Monday, December 6, 2010 8:18 AM
Re: More 1.4(D)
B1
I just left DC last night and got to Brussels this morning.They have me on a treadmill but I will get to Bob. I already
emailed our ambassador to Bangladesh who was pulled into this several months ago."
143;"I won't be there for some of your meetings today;however, wanted you to know that Norwegians agreed to match our
contribution to facilitate high crime cases and forensics work in DRC. They have been consistently excellent partners and
are very happy about your announcement to do a national plan on 1325, where they have also led. At NATO yesterday, I
learned about their recently adopted action plan on 1325, which the Dep SG said will have application in Afgh.
For the OECD meeting today, know that their leadership has been very supportive of our efforts to get OECD to collect
better data on women and economy as this is important to accelerating economic growth by addressing existing
barriers to women's economic participation.
I had very good mtgs at EU on potential development partnerships and sharing of successful models for gender
mainstreaming. Many greetings extended to you from all your friends.
Heading to Ukraine in the snow!"
143;"Verveer, Melanne S <VerveerMS@state.gov>
Tuesday, December 7, 2010 3:41 AM
Fw: Norwegians to Issue Statement on
Also appropriate for today. Scroll down from top email to first in chain.
1.4(D)"
143;"Verveer, Melanne S <VerveerMS@state.gov>
Tuesday, December 7, 2010 4:52 PM
Fw: latest B1
1.4(D)"
143;"1.4(D)
I would love
I've made it to Luxor for Mrs. Mubatak's conference on trafficking. She has gathered all the key stakeholders for this. If
you have a minute, you might I'm now on my way with the Minister on Families to a renunciation of FGM
ceremony by a conservative village. Mrs M has been responsible for so much social progress. 40 clerics have been
arrested for registering child marriages in so-called temporary marriages of children to old Gulf men who pay off their
poor parents.
-----"
143;"I'm so devastated
Mrs Mubarak has done a magnificent job with the conference. She asked me to go to a couple of the schools she has
renovated in the poorest neighborhoods of Luxor as part of her schools' program. They are state of the art and become
magnets for redevelopment. She sends her best. You have been mentioned with great affection repeatedly here by so
many. I also went to a huge community renunciation of FGM in a rural area -- some 2000 villagers with men speaking
eloquently about why this practice would be no more. This is another great effort they are making here to end FGM
through community education. So amidst bad news, there is also the good. We also managed to dodge the latest
wikileaks story here. Heading back tomw."
143;"He was larger than life in everything he did -- from AfPak, the UN job, the Balkans - even to planning his annual Xmas
party for you. It will be hard to imagine not having him in our midst."
143;"on: 12/13/2025
From
To: Verveer, Melanne S
Sent: Tue Dec 14 21:21:04 2010
Subject: Re: Norwegian Agency for Development Cooperation (NORAD) published its statement
B1
1.4(D)
Dear Melanne:
B1
1.4(
Sent wirelessly via BlackBerry
B6
B1
1.4(D)"
143;"PVerveer B6
Friday, December 17, 2010 12:12 AM
From B6
Please
let me know if I can be of any help to your department and will happy to do and please thank
Mrs. Hillary Clinton on behalf of me and
. supporting Afghan women.
•Thank you,
B6
B6
B6
B6
B6
B6
B6
B6"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
202;"Madame Secretary:
Thank you for reaching out to Secretary Solis and convincing her to join the Verification Commission. She and Ricardo
Lagos will make for a very high profile and effective international component of the Commission.
We will meet with her this morning at 10 am to brief her for Tuesday's journey to Honduras. At this point, it appears we
have a military aircraft available. The plan is for the U.S. Delegation to depart D.C., stop in Miami to pick up Ricardo
Lagos, and arrive in Tegucigalpa together. We think this will send a powerful message to Hondurans and leave no doubt
about our commitment to seeing this process through to a successful conclusion.
You should be aware that Ambassador Hugo Llorens is under public assault. The Wall Street Journal dedicates its
America's column this morning to attacking him and calling for his removal. Last Friday, Representative Connie Mack did
the same. This chorus will grow as the extent of our accomplishment is understood. Llorens is a tough, stalwart guy. He
and his Mission have held firm during this crisis. A call from you would be a big boost.
Finally, we will hold an IPC today to identify further steps. We will keep you up to date on these steps and identify
further opportunities for your engagement.
I want to thank you for your leadership and support during this long crisis. Your willingness to engage at key moments
and take risks at the right time have propelled us much further than anyone expected. Your diplomacy prevented a
debilitating civil conflict in Honduras that would have destabilized Central America and undermined two decades of our
efforts. We now have a big opportunity in front of us, and for that we are grateful to you.
Regards,
Tom"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
42;"Kelly, Craig A <KellyC@state.gov>
Monday, January 18, 2010 9:39 AM
H; Valenzuela, Arturo A
Re: Venezuela
Madam Secretary:
I will be in touch with Judith, RI et al.
Best,
Craig"
42;
42;"Kelly, Craig A <KellyC@state.gov>
Monday, January 18, 2010 11:52 AM
H
RE: Venezuela
Best,
ck
SBU
This email is UNCLASSIFIED"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
182;"I will be out of the office on official travel through Tuesday May 4. Please send any urgent action items to the SCA Staff
Assistants or SCA PDAS Pat Moon. Thanks, Bob"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
172;Piper Campbell is out of Washington until Wed., Dec 29. Please contact Maya Seiden or Nadia Shepherd.
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
46;"Hi,
Attached is a new draft in which I have tried to pack in the changes/additions you requested yesterday (as well
as Cheryl's and Lissa's suggested edits).
To use a metaphor (or rather simile) of the season, we are at the stage where it's a bit like decorating a
Christmas tree: trying to hang the ornaments so no branch bends too much, and so the whole tree stays upright.
I wanted to get it to you first, but will circulate to the others now, and can send to Oscar if that's helpful in terms
of getting you a hard copy.
Dan"
46;"I think Jake should be on the call.
Once the call is scheduled, I will get a version to you before the call that reflects the latest revisions I've
received.
Dan
On Sun, Dec 13, 2009 at 7:56 AM, H <HDR22@clintonemai1.com> wrote:
The latest draft is getting closer. And I agree w Dan that we have to be careful not to topple the tree w too
many ornaments. That said, I'd like to have a call w you (and anyone else who you think should be on) this
afternoon or evening to raise a few points. I'm copying Lona and Huma so they can help schedule it. Thanks
for all your good work."
46;"Either works for me-- I am working through various sets of line edits right now. I can get a new draft out by
4pm-- depends on how much time you want to review before we talk.
Dan
On Sun, Dec 13, 2009 at 2:20 PM, H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
Could we do at 4:30 or 6:45?"
46;"This draft, for the 7pm call, reflects HRC edits.
Dan
Daniel Baer
202-687-1403 (o)"
46;"I will fax a copy of this version to the house momentarily.
Comments / suggestions are in brackets as you requested.
FYI, a non-annotated version sent to D(S) and D(L), Burns, as well as to folks at NSC who had weighed in.
I will be back in office by 730.
Dan"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
165;Will do Madam Secretary.
165;Out on official travel until late in the afternoon of Thursday Oct 22, 2009.
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
100;We'll meet you in Arizona. Sounds like you are doing OK.
100;I'm having breakfast with Ken Salazar. Will call when that's over. 9:30ish.
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
63;"Tauscher, Ellen 0 <TauscherE0@state.gov>
Sunday, November 15, 2009 12:17 PM
H B6
Hillary! Thank you so much. How fabulous you were on Meet the Press. I'm so proud of you. I'm in Prague on my way to
Ankara Tuesday. Started off in New Delhi on Thursday and yes, Jim will be with us at your house for dinner Friday night.
Please stay safe on your travels and I'm so thrilled to work for you.
Best,
Ellen"
63;"I am traveling and have limited access to email. Please contact my office Chief of Staff, Simon Limage at
LimageSG@state.gov."
63;"Thank you for your message. I am currently traveling and will be out of the office until Thursday 2/11/10.
If you need assistance with a scheduling matter please reach out to my Scheduler, Eric Woodard, at 202-647-1522.
For all other issues needing immediate attention please contact my Chief-of-Staff, Simon Limage, at 202-647-1749."
63;I just landed in London and will work on it with Gary Samore first thing Monday and will get back to you asap Ellen.
63;"Thanks, glad I can help. Looking forward to going back. Leaving Sunday, stopping in Paris to do some civil nuclear
meetings then into Geneva to meet with Antonev on Tuesday.
Looking forward to talking when convenient on secure line this weekend."
63;"Shall we try for today while you are in air? I'll have Ops work it for us. If corns don't cooperate their Sunday is best me.
I'm on the road Saturday and it will be difficult to go secure.
Safe travels.
Ellen"
63;"Thank you for your message. I am currently traveling on official business and can be reached on my Blackberry.
If you need assistance with a scheduling matter please reach out to my Scheduler, Eric Woodard, at 202-647-1522.
For all other issues needing immediate attention please contact my Chief-of-Staff, Simon Limage, at 202-647-1749."
63;"Madam Secretary, .
Thanks so much for the experience of a life time. It is my honor to work for you and learn from you.
See you this morning,
Best,
Ellen"
63;"Dear Hillary,
I hear from Dianne and my staff that New Start is in play in the final CR/tax extension deal so I'm hopeful although I find
the process disturbing.
B6
-----"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
89;"I will be in and out of the office this week, but will intermittently check my e-mail. Should you need assistance with
urgent matters concerning FSI and NENA area studies,please contact Program Assistant John Manion,
manionje@state.gov, 703-302-6862."
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
93;
93;"ebeigetu flork antes Just FYI. Palau UN Amb. Beck says you were friends in law school & thought you
recognized him when he came in w/Pres. Toribiong. Hope you're not in pain and mend
soon. Jeff
June 20, 2009
The Myth of the $12 Million Uighur
. By STUART BECK
CONGRATULATIONS Palau. Our little country, a group of islands 500 miles east of the Philippines, has become, if only
briefly, a household word. President Obama, much admired in Palau, asked our new president, Johnson Toribiong, to do
the United States a favor: Please accept, as refugees, a group of innocent Chinese Muslims. They are not anti-American
terrorists, but victims of human rights violations, who landed at Guantanamo Bay for seven years. Innocent, stateless,
harmless.
President Toribiong, a lawyer trained at the University of Washington and a highly regarded litigator, told President
Obama and Secretary of State Hillary Clinton that he needed to assure his people that the Uighurs were indeed harmless,
and could be integrated into Palau's small, diverse and friendly culture. Assuming that this due diligence brought
satisfactory results, Palau would be pleased to give the refugees temporary residence. Last weekend, he dispatched a
number of officials to Guantanamo to interview the Uighurs and review their records.
One would have thought that this positive gesture of friendship from a staunch American ally would have been applauded,
at least in the United States. Instead, for reasons that are beyond me, unattributed leaks and unsubstantiated rumors have
twisted Palau's act of decency into another grab for dollars by a cunning third-world country. In breaking the story that
Palau was amenable to President Obama's request, the Associated Press reported that two anonymous State Department
officials had linked Palau's acceptance of the Uighurs to a $200 million payoff.
Almost immediately, much of the news media took the bait, did the math and asserted that Palau was getting nearly $12
million dollars per Uighur. Within a day or two, The Wall Street Journal was pontificating against a shakedown.
Before the story gets too far out of hand, let's consider a few facts. It is true that the United States and Palau have an
economic relationship. Palau has been receiving American aid since it was wrested from the Japanese in 1944. (Over the
past 15 years, this has averaged about $56 million a year.) This aid has come with strings; as the United States has always
insisted that the Palauan government be ready to promptly turn over land for bases should the security of the United
States or Palau require it.
B6
In 1994, the two countries agreed to a 50-year option that allows the United States to use Palau for military purposes. That
agreement's economic terms expire in October 2009, and a new economic package for the remaining 35 years is in the
works — and has been for some time. But there has never been a mention of $200 million. And no one has even hinted at
linking the deal to Palau's acceptance of the Uighurs. The United States simply offered to pay relocation costs for the
Uighurs of less than $90,000 per person to cover transportation, food, housing and medical help until the men can get
oriented and get jobs.
Palau is a small and peaceful community. Its constitution bans weapons of all kinds. Capital crimes are virtually unknown.
Social life revolves around the family. Children wander from house to house. Could anyone believe that the leaders of
Palau would risk the safety and serenity of their modern Eden in exchange for money? Is it plausible that these close-knit
people would countenance the presence of terrorists in their midst? I can assure you the answer is no.
Last week, the Palauans lowered their flags to half-staff in memory of Sgt. Jasper Obakrairur, a Palauan who joined the
United States Marines and died on June 1 helping to root out the Taliban in Afghanistan. He was the fourth Palauan
serviceman to die in recent years, following his fallen comrades in American uniform Cpl. JayGee Meluat, Cpl.
Meresebang Ngiraked and Specialist Philton Ueld. The people of Palau are very proud of them, and of our country's special
relationship with the United States. Can't Americans be proud of the relationship, too?
Stuart Beck is Palau's permanent representative to the United Nations."
93;"Below is the statement of very impressive Palau reps at the end of a session of required meetings on the next
phase of free association aid. FYI only, the Palauans were insulted by the nature and depth of the response to
their proposal as well as the content and the overall approach. They are even privately questioning the
relationship. (This hasn't affected their intent to take the Uighurs.) I will send a few further thoughts.
At the conclusion of yesterday's meeting, the Palau delegation caucused to discuss its reaction to the response of the United
States delegation to the proposals that it made in June in Washington D.C., and expanded upon in subsequent communications.
While the Palau delegation has agreed to respond to certain additional questions raised by the United States delegation on specific
elements of the Palau proposal, and further has agreed to participate in certain working groups on specific issues, the Palau
delegation was deeply disappointed with the response of the United States delegation. The United States delegation did not
seriously respond, as required by the Compact, to the operational requirements of the Government of Palau or to Palau's
comprehensive and considered plans to achieve economic advancement and self-sufficiency.
In light of the foregoing, the Palau delegation has determined that it must now return to Palau to discuss with President Toribiong
the next steps that Palau needs to take regarding the Compact. Thank you.
Jeff
Jeffrey L. Farrow
202-343-2905 o"
93;"Wouldn't tell him U have a $ # & will work with him within it. State has just agreed to a meeting 9/28 to determine
Palau's needs. Such a
meeting is required by the Compact as a step before agreeing on aid.
Having a # before makes a sham of the meeting. Palau has rejected the # & wouldn't accept it even if the Pres. did. He
won't because it would deplete Trust Fund by 2024 or so altho it is to last thru 2044 term of base rights, forcing Palau to
hope US will replenish fund in
2024. Explaining this to Jake too.
Jeff
B6"
93;"Our Co-Chairs, now Sec. of State McClintock and Dem. Comm. Chair Prats, have written a book about a campaign that
was historic in terms of a majority in PR and cooperation between statehooders and commonwealthers.
They want a foreword by you & WJC and pictures of your visits. I'll follow up with Cheyrl and Laura Graham on the
foreward and can do a draft if one is OK.
On Palau, I'll be following up with Jake. State's proposal would cut per capita income 20% over six years and 10% over
the 15 of the agreement being sought.
Jeff
Jeffrey L. Farrow
B6"
93;"Signed by Pres. Toribiong a couple of hours ago after three days of negotiations that I conducted for Palau and DAS
Frankie Reed led for the US. These were the first real negotiations of the process -- a step (which Jake Sullivan helped
get taken) that was as needed as the changes in the US proposal they produced. Thanks for all that you did. It obtained
US objectives as well as resulted in substantially greater fairness for a former territory, now freely associated state. Jeff
On Jul 28, 2010, at 8:46 AM, H wrote:
> Thx for the ood wishes
> I hope the Palau Compact can be resolved soon because I doubt we will have the funds to do it next year w the budget
and the potential setbacks in the mid-terms. PIS try to work w everyone to finalize.
> And, give my warmest ""Hola"" to my friends in PR.
>"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
201;"Thanks I wish I could tell u I am looking forward to this but it would be a lie! Get better...
----"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
85;"Secretary Clinton,
I hope that all is well back in the States and just wanted to let you know that I will be in Washington
Wednesday. If you might have a minute to spare to follow up on your last message in person or by phone this
week or over the weekend, I would very much appreciate the opportunity. Congratulations on the Europe
trip!
Yours sincerely, Jackie
Jacqueline Newmyer
President, Long Term Strategy Group
12 Eliot St., Cambridge, MA 02138
617-661-1626 (fax)
www.ltstrategy.com"
85;"Hi, Yes; I am at (en route to airport). Thank you!
Sent from my Verizon Wireless BlackBerry"
85;"Dear Secretary Clinton,
I am seeing Michelle on Tuesday at 3 pm. Thank you very much for making this happen, and I will let you know how the
meeting goes.
Congratulations on all the glowing first 100 days reviews. Hope your testimony yesterday went well. Mine is attached,
fyi.
All best, and thank you again, Jackie
Jacqueline Newmyer
President, Long Term Strategy Group
12 Eliot St., Cambridge, MA 02138
B6
617-661-1626 (fax)
www.ltstrategy.com"
85;"Dear Secretary Clinton,
Welcome back, and I hope that your proposals on universal NATO ROE's for piracy are moving ahead. I just wanted to
let you know that I will be testfying at a hearing of the US-China Commission on Chinese foreign-directed information
operations on 30 April, and also participating in a symposium at Harvard on Iran and Afghanistan later that day, so I will
let you know if anything of interest comes out of those events.
I remain intrigued by your suggestion that I speak with Michelle Flournoy. Should I reach out to her, or wait for her to
be in touch?
Many thanks, as ever.
Yours, Jackie
On 4/8/09, newmyer
> Hi, Yes; I am at
wrote:
en route to airport). Thank you!
> Sent from my Verizon Wireless BlackBerry
>"
85;"Secretary Clinton, Hi,
Thank you! I am available to talk any time. I would also be happy to come to Washington (or wherever)
to discuss this in person at your convenience.
\ so after 1:30 pm tomorrow would be
safest. My cell is
Yrs, Jackie
On Sun, Mar 29, 2009 at 2:30 PM, H <hdr22@c1intonemai1.com> wrote:
Jackie—I'd like to talk to you about your choices. Michelle Fluornoy, new Undersecretary at DOD, asked me
about young women who could work w her in planning and whom she could mentor. And, of course, I thought
of you!
When would be good times for me to call you? Best, H
Jacqueline Newmyer
President, Long Term Strategy Group
12 Eliot St., Cambridge, MA 02138
617-661-1620 (ph)
617-661-1626 (fax)
www.ltstrategy.com"
85;"ps I am also looking forward to telling you about my meeting with Anne-Marie on Thursday. Thank you very
much for that as well!
On Sun, Mar 29, 2009 at 3:44 PM, Jackie Newmyer wrote:
Secretary Clinton, Hi,
Thank you! I am available to talk any time. I would also be happy to come to Washington (or wherever)
to discuss this in person at your convenience.
\ so after 1:30 pm tomorrow would be
safest. My cell is
Yrs, Jackie
On Sun, Mar 29, 2009 at 2:30 PM, H <hdr22@clintonemai1.com> wrote:
Jackie--I'd like to talk to you about your choices. Michelle Fluornoy, new Undersecretary at DOD, asked me
about young women who could work w her in planning and whom she could mentor. And, of course, I
thought of you!
When would be good times for me to call you? Best, H
Jacqueline Newmyer
President, Long Term Strategy Group
12 Eliot St., Cambridge, MA 02138
617-661-1620 (ph)
617-661-1626 (fax)
www.ltstrategy.com
Jacqueline Newmyer
President, Long Term Strategy Group
12 Eliot St., Cambridge, MA 02138
617-661:1620 (ph)
617-661-1626 (fax)
www.ltstrategy.com"
85;"Secretary Clinton,
Pending our conversation, I thought I owed Anne-Marie a thank you and follow up message because we had a
terrific chat on Thursday,
bringing to bear the best extra-governmental academic expertise
through the Long Term Strategy Group so I just sent a proposal memo (attached and pasted in
below). Thank you again for recommending me and for all of your advice.
I am most eager to help however I can and look forward to hearing your thoughts.
All best. Jackie
Memorandum
To: Department of State"
85;"Dear Secretary Clinton,
I hope that your elbow is healing quickly. I mentioned that we were doing some work on maritime developments in the
region from the Persian Gulf to the East China Sea and Sea of Japan. Below are key findings from the report, but the
main takeaway is that the political impact of Chinese military modernization may be greater than a narrow technical
analysis of China's capabilities would suggest, and for a range of reasons, technical and political, prospects for regional
cooperation are limited, but pathways to conflict are numerous and increasing.
All best, Jackie
Key findings from the workshop include:
• Chinese naval modernization has proceeded at rates higher than
forecast 10 years ago and has created the capability to complicate operation of US carrier battle groups within 1,000
kilometers of the Chinese coastline.
• The Indian Ocean may in the coming decades be the operating area of
SSBNs from countries with limited experience in sustained SSBN patrols, including India, China, and possibly Pakistan.
• Chinese maritime relations with countries along the littoral area
have continued to develop, with a new friendly relationship emerging with Sri Lanka, to complement the existing
relations with Myanmar and Pakistan. This may lead to a new form of ""blue-brown water"" naval operations, in which
Chinese naval forces operate far from Chinese bases, but close to the coasts of client states.
The workshop tended to the conclusion that the trends in the region were not such as to make maritime cooperation
easy. These trends
include:
Japanese concern that Chinese dominance in the waters within 1,000
miles of Chinese territory has immediate consequences for Japan's maritime autonomy.
• Indian suspicion of Chinese naval developments in Hainan Island,
Chinese development of port infrastructure in Pakistan and Myanmar, and the possibility of Chinese ballistic missile
submarines operating close to India.
• Indian interest in SSBNs, plus Chinese SSBN ports in Hainan and
even, possibly, Pakistani SSBNs, all of which creates the possibility of multiple SSBN patrols in the Indian Ocean, along
with the potential for naval nuclear accidents at sea.
• Asymmetries in levels of operational competence, and technology, in
submarines and maritime aviation, which, for example, make functional multi-national naval cooperation harder for
states that are afraid of revealing technologies or weaknesses.
• The major role of land-based maritime warfare strike complexes in
this region, which means that war at sea always carries with it the risk of escalation to strikes on ground targets in
homeland areas.
The report also offers two scenarios under which the United States may consider engaging militarily in the region.
The first scenario, which concerns a clash between Japan and China in waters claimed by both, compels us to consider:
• The circumstances under which the Chinese may seek to demonstrate
that their new maritime capabilities must be taken seriously and respected, and
• What the United States would lose if it did not support the
Japanese, and then faced a world in which Japan became either a subordinate power to China or a nuclear armed state,
capable of pursuing its national interest independent of the United States.
The second scenario concerns an American naval blockade of an Iran that has tested a nuclear weapon, potentially
giving rise to an interaction between the United States and China far from the operating bases of each but close to
territory of a client of China, a ""blue-brown water"" clash. In this scenario, China is using its navy to show presence, and
to force the United States to ask itself whether it wants to go to war with China over a political conflict that is less than
black and white. Thinking about the options that would be left to the United States under these circumstances
underscores how Chinese naval forces may have more political impact by 2025 than a narrow assessment of their
military capabilities would suggest.
On Fri, May 22, 2009 at 7:45 AM, <newmyer wrote:
> Secretary Clinton, The Australian is the newspaper in which I read
> your remarks on Asia-Pacific. Thank you again, Jackie
> Sent from my Verizon Wireless BlackBerry
>"
85;"Secretary Clinton,
Thank you! Will update you when I hear from her, and if there is anything else I should do, let me know. All
best, Jackie
ps Saw that Foreign Minister Yeo was on your schedule today. Fyi, he is one of my favorite Singaporeans
because of this 2007 speech on China, which he posted to his blog (!):
April 12, 2007
Foreign Minister George Yeo's speech at a dinner organised by the Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy on 5
February 2007, which he gave off-the-cuff.
Thank you Kishore for your kind words. Dear friends, ladies and gentlemen. I was in India two weeks ago, had
a good trip, spent nine days there. While in Calcutta after calling on the Chief Minister, I had a bit of time to
look around so I attended a mass at Mother Theresa's house. Very interesting gathering; there was a Singapore
nun there, she had been there for over ten years; Sister Maria Tony. I wondered why someone from Singapore
would want to dedicate her life to picking up the dead and the dying in the back alleys of Calcutta and living
that life. There were many nuns there who were in their ninth year. They take their first vow in the fifth year,
renewable every year. In the tenth year they have to decide - final vows for eternity. So if you are not sure,
please, there's a way out; if you are sure, then you're in the room. So the priest gave a very tough sermon and
while he was talking, I could hear the din of traffic noise outside, in the streets of Calcutta. Then suddenly, I
heard the call of the muezzin. Now this is a Hindu city. I told myself, I thought wow, what diversity in this
country, India, and its ability to internalise this diversity and to find it unremarkable that the tiny woman from
Albania should come into their midst, become one of them and then when she was beatified, was celebrated as
an Indian, on the way to canonization.
China and India in that comparison- China is not India. China has a very different sense of itself; its deep
internal construction is very different. Superficially there are similarities, as there is between China and the US
and China and Europe. But if you look into it's deep construction, it is very different. When we talk about
China's future and China in the 21st century, how China will behave in a world community, China's attitudes
towards democracy, towards law, towards social justice. It is important first to look into this deep construction
because that is their nature. Naturally we should not be deterministic, there is nothing inevitable in human
history, but when we understand its nature, it becomes easier to anticipate its moves and you'll be less suprised
by its actions.
A few years ago, the Chinese government embarked on a major project which is its dynastic duty- to write the
history of the Qing dynasty, the Manchus, from 1368 to 1644. Ever since the Han dynasty, roughly
contemporaneous with the Roman Empire, they developed a historiographic tradition of each dynasty writing
the history of the previous period. So Sima Qian of the Later Han wrote of the earlier Han and the entire period
before that; then later on they wrote about the Later Han, Jin wrote up the Three Kingdoms; Ming wrote up the
Yuan: The Yuan, which was Mongol in its origins wrote up the Sung. Sung wrote up the Tang dynasty which
was the Classical Period. The last dynasty, the Qing, collapsed in the Republican Revolution of 1911; this is
now 2007. I think in 2003, they embarked on this project, 'The Official History of the Qing dynasty'. When the
former Vice Premier Li Lanqing was in Singapore recently, I asked him about it. He said ""we told the scholars
not to rush this project"". I asked him how long it would take to write this history. He said it would take many
years, easily 10 years. I said, ""have you collected the material?"" He said yes. I asked, ""external sources?"" He
said yes, external sources too. All the countries, the Vatican, European countries, the whole lot; all assembled -
24 official histories, this would be the 26th. And Li's instruction to them was not to be too quick to draw
conclusions!
Now Mao Tze Tung was a revolutionary, he was a great revolutionary. He overturned everything before but he
knew his history, he read the 24 histories, and not only did he read them, he annotated them. But he wrote with
a terrible, illegible scrawl, so scholars had to decipher those scrawls. Then they wrote commentaries on his
commentaries and now it's all published. It is very difficult for the Chinese to depart from their own history
because it's the same great plains, the same mountains more or less, the same neighbours more or less and they
have seen the same patterns recur. So a long time ago during the Ming dynasty they wrote up the romantic
period of the Three Kingdoms. The first line said: ""Below heaven, great movements, great currents, long
disunity leads to unity and long unity leads to disunity."" So they accept as a part of their own deep nature that
there are cycles in their civilisation; that they have ups and downs. In recent years, when you visit them, you
could sense them feeling their own re-emergence, it's a bit scary. In the initial years, they were lacking in
confidence, they asked many questions, but now they know that there is an organic vitality. It is like an
adolescent who watches his own development, and conscious of it. I say scary because for those of us who live
on the periphery of that empire, what happens there will radiate its influence on us and eventually, to a greater
or lesser degree envelope us.
How do we see China? I think to begin with, it's important not to try and, from an intellectual viewpoint,
transpose our own experiences on to China, because I believe it will develop according to its own logic,
according to its own DNA. It is growing now, it will continue to grow, it will develop its own contradictions
and one day those contradictions, many years from now, will lead to its own decline. So they say at the
beginning of a dynasty the taxes are light but the treasury is full, and at the end of a dynasty, the taxes are
crushing but the treasury is empty. The important thing to realise about China is that some things are deeply
resistant to change. Take Confucius. Every time they had to overturn a dynasty, they had to overturn Confucius,
because Confucius justified the status quo. So throughout the 19th century, whether it was the Taiping
Revolution, the Communist movement or Sun Yat Sen; they spent their lives debunking Confucius. It reached
its final moment when they criticised Zhou Enlai together with Confucius- no- Lin Biao together with
Confucius. That was the last paroxysm. Today, Hu Jingtao said [in Mandarin He Xie She Hui ], ""harmonious
society"". Suddenly you hear the resonance of Confucius coming back. And everywhere in the world on the
pattern of Alliance Francaise, the Goethe Institute, the USIA, they establish Confucius Institutes and the
learning of the Confucianist classics are coming back with remarkable force in China, not yet in the state
curriculum but just parents wanting to teach their children the Confucianist ditties. Now why is this important?
From Mao to Deng to Jiang Zemin, at every stage, they re-interpreted Marx. They are comfortable with the
young Marx, the idea of the superstructure on the economic base, the idea that politics is concentrated
economics- that they like. But the class struggle, they downplay. They talk about the Three Represents, the
progressive forces, the progressive elements, they nurture those. Now Hu Jingtao says ""harmonious society"",
""peaceful re-emergence"". This mindset has a certain attitude towards law, has a certain attitude towards religion,
towards democracy and towards foreign policy and I would like, to deal with each in turn.
Joseph Needham many years ago, I think in the 60's, the man who wrote The Science and Civilisation of China,
that great encyclopedic work; he said its not that the Chinese have no legal tradition. In fact, by his estimation,
the Chinese had a greater corpus of legal codification than the West. A greater corpus of legal codification than
the West! Surprise, surprise. But the idea that the Emperor is below the law, that is completely alien to their
thinking. Where did that idea come from? Well in the West, you may trace it back to Hammurabi, you may
trace it back to Moses, to Greece, to Rome. But if you trace the evolution of that DNA, it goes back, way back,
into its early beginnings. The Chinese had a very different evolutionary starting point. It was not in law, it was
in an idea they call '1i' which is proper conduct among human beings. They believe, deep in their instincts, that
law is only a means towards justice, and that when the outcome of law is perverse, then that law must be
overridden, because justice, proper conduct, the proper relationship among human beings must take
precedence. And to suddenly say that all that had happened in the previous dynasties, all that the earlier
histories have summarised, are all wrong and that they should instead adopt something with its origins in
Western Europe, which had as its crowning moment the crowning of Charlemagne by the Pope in the year 800;
to them, what are you talking about? For the Chinese, laws are more like regulations, means towards a larger
end. Their attitude towards democracy follows a parallel pattern.
Democracy is not an end in itself, democracy is a means and they are quite happy to consider democracy as a
useful means towards government and that at appropriate places and appropriate levels, democracy is good. So
at the village and the township level they have democracy, it is a universal franchise. They approve a slate of
candidates, and they have fierce elections, fierce campaigning, and those who are incompetent or arrogant or
despotic, they get chucked out. But once you reach the level of the cities and the provinces, they say no. No
direct democracy. Why not? Because they do not believe, with their view of the universe, that that is the way to
produce good government. Any more than the Catholic Church believes that the way to elect the Pope is
through universal franchise. That the parishioners should decide who should be the parish priest. The Parish
Council, maybe, that's ok. But the parish priest? Bishops? Universal franchise? That's against God's laws. They
have that kind of instinct embedded in them, it is not Communist, it is just Chinese. And they know that too
much democracy, invariably leads to 'localitis'; of favouritism towards friends, relatives, people who are from
the same villages whom we have a relationship with.
We have the same problem in Singapore, in fact this problem exists throughout East Asia. Till today, apart from
Singapore, among Chinese communities and among many East Asian communities, the idea that ultimate
control of the business should go outside the family is unpersuasive. You talk to Li Ka-shing, you talk to Robert
Kwok, you talk to Lim Soe Liong, you talk to any of them; they will go back to the family. Why? Because they
believe that in the end, what matters at the deepest level, is trust. And the family guarantees you that trust.
This is also the Indian wisdom. So you have the Marwaris controlling the economy of Calcutta, you have the
Parsees, you have Sindhis, of which Kishore is a member, you have the Chettiars. They operate on the basis of
deep trust and at a completely different level from that of contract law. And because they distrust local
affiliations, in two dynasties, Ming and Qing, no senior official could serve within 400 miles of where he was
born. No local official to serve within 400 miles, so in other words, in Singapore, no Singaporean can govern
Singapore. They go beyond that, today there's almost no province in China where the provincial leader is from
that province. Now you consider this, you transpose this onto Europe, it's as if routinely, the President of France
is not French. And if you are a German, you are disqualified as a Chancellor of the Republic. And an Italian
cannot be trusted to serve in Rome. Ancient wisdom! What is remarkable is this is accepted as legitimate. If you
are Cantonese and you have a Northener squatting over you, you do not consider it perverse or an abomination.
This is part of life and in fact, you are more likely to have impartial governor than if a local boy were to be
there, because he is more likely to favour those who are related to him or those who are his friends.
So when you talk democracy to the Chinese, it is against this cultural backdrop. So what applied to the Qing
dynasty, the Ming dynasty, they have taken a step further recently in China. They introduced even more rules,
governing the circumstances under which you are disqualified from serving in the area near where you were
born. You can't stay in a ministry for too long, you can't stay in a department for too long beacuse if you stay
too long, you develop affiliations and those affiliations will result in sidedoors and guanxi and corruption. Of
course, many of these rules will still be breached, and there will be scandals from time to time and they will act
on those scandals. For as long as the central leadership is pristine, the system can be maintained. But one day
they will become corrupt, as in so many previous dynasties, and a downward spiral begins. And it is very
difficult in that situation to reverse it.
So I mentioned at the table that for India, it's not a country that can sustain a revolution, because its deep
structure would not allow for it. I think China is a country which can only be renewed through periodic
revolutions. Kishore asked me when- I said well maybe in 200 years time because these are long cycles and
they expect as a matter of course that the history of the People's Republic would not be written by the People's
Republic. It will be written by the next dynasty. Except that right now they say we shouldn't call it a dynasty,
we are now democrats, we are a republic, there is no Emperor...Well, whatever term you call it, it will be done
much later.
Let me now talk about their attitude towards religion. Being a Roman Catholic I follow quite closely the ups
and downs in their relationship with the Vatican and I find it quite fascinating. The Jesuits, when they went to
China in the Ming dynasty, hoped that they could convert the Emperor, and all of China would become Catholic
and a great mission would have been achieved. They never succeeded. Some of the brightest minds from
Europe went there. Matteo Ricci, he corrected the Chinese calendar, he repaired the clocks in the palace, he saw
the throne, but he never got to meet the Emperor and he died in China. And his tomb, it's in the compound of
the Beijing Party School today. And the church which he founded is still there today. 'Li Matou', that's what he
called himself, he applied for permission to be buried in China and he was given that permission. Then when
the Manchus swept southwards, in 1644, the missionaries thought now they had a chance, ""the Manchus will be
a bit more accomodating towards us, we will yet Christianise China"". So if you read the despatches of the
missionaries during that period, the Tartar Wars they described it, they were full of hope. But not a chance.
They appealed to the Second Emperor, Kangxi.
""Can we send more missionaries?"" ""No problem"". ""Can we have them all report to a papal legate in Beijing""
""No such thing"". The Emperor imposed one condition: ""you can send as many priests as you want to China but
they must die in China, they cannot leave after that"". You see, instinctively, the Chinese, when they see the
Catholic Church, they see someone like themselves, someone whose claim to its members is total. And for
whom that loyalty is a jealous one.
Mind you they do not try to control everything; they just control the big things, dogma, doctrine. After that you
are left on your own and you are financially independent, but on the big issue of who appoints ministers and
provincial secretaries, it's the same as the Pope appointing Bishops and Bishops ordaining Priests and governing
this vast empire, whether we're talking about the Chinese empire or the Catholic empire. They have about the
same number of members in the world which is why their interaction is a complex and difficult one. And over
the appointment of Bishops, both seek ultimate authority. In the end they have got to find a way to resolve it. I
can anticipate the Vatican's argument that ""we are not of this realm, we are of the other realm, so please we are
not in conflict"". As for the Chinese leaders, their attitude towards religion from the earliest days is to keep
religion at arm's length. Those who govern the empire, they are areligious, they can have private religions, but
in matters of their public conduct, they are Confucianist. In public, you are not a Catholic, you are not a
Muslim, you are not a Buddhist. When the Jesuits went to China, they were very impressed by this - that it was
possible to create a moral order based not on religion but on ethics. So impressed, that they wrote about it, and
influenced people like Voltaire and the other Encyclopedists. It helped inspire the Frence revolution- that you
could get rid of the Church, and still maintain a moral order in society.
I've talked about China and law, China and democracy, China and religion, now let me talk about China and
foreign policy which is perhaps your greatest interest; about which I can only talk about generally because you
are the experts in this field. I think it's very difficult for the Chinese to break from their old mindset that they are
[Zhong Guo], the Middle Kingdom, they are at the center of the Universe, then there are the other 'chopsticks
peoples' who are semi-Sinic. I think they consider Singapore to be semi-Sinic. Then there are those who are
beyond that realm, who are what the Greeks would have called Barbarians. The Mongols, the Manchus, the
Europeans, the Americans, the Indians and so on.
Now all that jargon of course is not in use today. They are very civilised, they will welcome you with great
hospitality - lavish dinners, very courteous words, offering you the best of everything in the house. It reminded
me of the way my mother used to teach us at home, we were a big family and the stranger has got to be treated
well, the visitor has to be treated well, because you are afraid of the visitor. So you always treat visitors better
than your own family members because the visitor is capricious, he can harm you so make sure you fit him in.
Those who are within your authority, you can always maintain order anyway. This is the way, in their minds,
the universe is ordered. So I can understand why the Koreans, the Japanese, the Vietnamese, to some extent, the
Singaporeans, they feel uncomfortable about what they see as a repetition of a pattern they have seen many
times before in the past. Will the Chinese change this principle of foreign policy, I think they have, because,
never in their history have they met, have they existed in close contact with competing centers of power, with
the US, with Europe, India, and you are no longer separated by oceans which cannot be crossed, mountains
which cannot be crossed, now they are connected. So they are making adjustments.
It will be interesting to watch how they handle their Olympics; if the Olympics become an exercise of pure
Chinese nationalism, I think the international reaction against China will be very severe. But I think the Chinese
will be sophisticated. I expect they will organise cheer teams for the Americans, for the Japanese, so that there
is an appearance of courtesy and common humanity. They are very careful to ensure that their words fit
conditions today.
But let me say in their defence that many of these methods they use arise out of fear, not out of a desire to
dominate. If you analyse the old tributary system, those who sent tributes got more than they gave in return. It
became a racket. So the Japanese merchants competed to get tokens from [Ryukyu] in order to be able to do the
China trade because it meant a lot of money. The Chinese are fearful of foreigners. They are fearful of the
Russians to the north, the Muslims to the West, the Indians across the Himalayas, but mostly the Americans
across the Pacific. Their strategy is to keep the temperature low, low profile, hide the shine of your armour, the
shine of your sword, just play the game and concentrate on economic development. Internally will they make
preparations? I have no doubt, because they have a deep fear. Is their intention to dominate, to conquer, the way
the European powers did in the past? I don't think so. I don't think there is a great desire to turn non-Chinese
into Chinese. Maybe Korea, maybe Vietnam, maybe Mongolia, who at various points in time were part of their
greater empire, they might consider worth civilising. But beyond that, Sinicising Indians, Russians? No, I don't
think they will want to do that. So as they now become stronger and more powerful, I believe that while their
old nature will re-assert itself, they will also be reacting to us. If they find the world a threatening place, they
will develop their own responses to those threats.
Quite early in the day, they wanted to neutralise Southeast Asia, Asean. It had never been an area which
threatened them, historically. So they didn't worry about Southeast Asia as a threat. But resources, sea lanes,
they go through Southeast Asia. And they made a dramatic move a few years ago. Zhu Rongji was here for the
ASEAN-China summit. He said, ""free trade agreement"". At that time when he announced it, the leaders of
ASEAN almost fell off their chairs. We thought of China an economic threat to us. Not as a partner. Took us
almost a year to digest the implications and to say yes, let's negotiate. Step by step. And all the time China was
assuring us that we would benefit more than they would benefit. When the Framework Agreement was signed
by Zhu Rongji in 2002 in Phonm Penh, he made two remarkable statements. He said if after 10 years, the
agreement benefits China more than it benefits Southeast Asia, let us renegotiate it. I can never imagine the
American USTR, or the European Trade Commissioner, talking like that. I mean in a contract, a deal is a deal,
it's settled for eternity. Then he said: ""China does not seek for itself an exclusive position in Southeast Asia"", so
he acknowledged that we were not just going to date one girl, we intended to be promiscuous from the
beginning. Towards Northeast Asia, I think it is very complicated, because there is so much history and legacy.
Towards Central Asia, towards Russia, they have deep fears. Towards America, it has become a relationship
bound together at so many points, a rupture would become more and more unthinkable. But it is going to be a
very difficult relationship, it will be the most important and most difficult relationship to manage in this
century. If it's badly managed there will be war, if it's properly managed there will be another generation of
peace and hundreds of millions of people in the world would be raised out of the depths of poverty. In this area,
you are the experts, but whenever I see China and watch its moves, I go back to its deep nature because it's not
easy for a country so vast, with such a sense of itself, to depart too much from its deep nature. Thank you.
George Yeo
On Mon, Apr 27, 2009 at 5:57 PM, H <HDR22@clintonemai1.com> wrote:
Michele,
I look forward to getting together to discuss a number of issues. Thanks for following up w Jackie Newmyer.
Her email:
All the best, Hillary
Jacqueline Newmyer
President, Long Term Strategy Group
12 Eliot St., Cambridge, MA 02138
617-661-1626 (fax)
www.ltstrategy.com"
85;"newmyer on behalf of Jackie Newmyer
Tuesday, September 29, 2009 11:20 AM
H
new Iran-China oil deal, reported in Iran (in English) and in China (in Chinese)
B6B6
Secretary Clinton,
Just wanted to make sure that you saw the news about one of China's oil conglomerates and the Iranian National Oil
Company over the
weekend:
Iran, China sign a major oilfield deal, Mon, 28 Sep 2009 15:05:09 GMT China National Petroleum Corp (CNPC) has signed
a contract with National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC) for the development of Iran's South Azadegan oilfield. The Chinese
company will buy a 70 percent share of the whole project, according to an agreement signed Sunday in Lausanne,
Switzerland between CNPC and NIOC's overseas investment subsidiary, Naftiran Intertrade Company (NICO) that covers
a 90 percent stake in the project.
A likely explanation would be that this deal has been long in the making. Still, Tehran's motivation for releasing this
information in English at this time is worth considering.
The whole story from an English-language Iranian outlet is pasted in below, and I found three Chinese-language sources
with corroborating reports (nothing in English from China, though):
http://business.sohu.com/20090929/n267094148.shtml
http://money.163.com/09/0929/14/5KCSKN5F002524SO.html
http://finance.sina.com.cn/world/gjjj/20090929/18566807524.shtml
Jackie
Press TV
Iran, China sign a major oilfield deal
Mon, 28 Sep 2009 15:05:09 GMT
China National Petroleum Corp (CNPC) has signed a contract with National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC) for the
development of Iran's South Azadegan oilfield.
The Chinese company will buy a 70 percent share of the whole project, according to an agreement signed Sunday in
Lausanne, Switzerland between CNPC and NIOC's overseas investment subsidiary, Naftiran lntertrade Company (NICO)
that covers a 90 percent stake in the project.
CNPC, which won a bid in January to develop the North Azadegan oilfield, now holds a 70 percent share of the project
with NICO holding 20 percent, and Inpex of Japan having the remaining 10 percent.
The South Azadegan project is slated to produce 260,000 barrels of crude oil per day, and its development will cost
around $2.5 billion.
The field, along the Iraqi border, holds reserves estimated at approximately 42 billion barrels of oil, one of the world's
largest finds in the last 30 years.
Iran provides 14 percent of China's demand for oil.
The deal is couched in buy-back terms, in which CNPC will hand over the operation of the field to NIOC after
development and will receive payments from the oil production for a few years to cover its investment.
China's investment in Iran's energy sector has increased as some western countries, led by the US, have sanctioned Iran
over its peaceful nuclear program.
Jacqueline Newmyer
President, Long Term Strategy Group
12 Eliot St., Cambridge, MA 02138
617-661-1620 (ph)
617-661-1626 (fax)
www.ltstrategy.com"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
54;"d.gunners RELEASE IN PART
B1,1.4(B),1.4(D), B6
Wednesday, September 29, 2010 3:24 PM
From David Miliband
Hillary -
1.4(B), 1.4(D), B1 — Declassify on: 09/29/2025
Thanks a lot for all the good wishes you have sent via Lois. It has been one of the pleasures of the last few months to see
you going from strength to strength. And the wedding looked fantastic!
Your message on Saturday was poignant. Losing is tough. When you win the party members and MPs doubly so. (When
it's your brother...). But I am so proud of the campaign we ran, the issues we raised etc. We got people to believe in a
New Labour platform - and modernised the platform.
I have announced today that I will stay in Parliament but not in shadow cabinet.
Thanks for all your encouragement over the last couple of years. I will let you know when I am in DC.
All best,
1.4(B)
1.4(D)
David
B1
Sent from my BlackBerry® wireless device"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
213;Hope. See picture below Kamala sent.
213;Another photo.
213;"Just wanted to tell you that speech yesterday was terrific. Important to say that never will be perfect security; that
diplomats can't operate in bunkers; that the world is a dangerous place. Thought NYT article this morning helpful as
well We have understandably been more on defense but love the offense. Thank you If any of us can help reinforce, let
us know,
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739700
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045701"
213;"Great you can begin PT- one of the best things in life for broken parts and aching bodies! Agree merger is a positive with good
possibilities. Nice to see you named best cabinet member in Washingtonian since job is so tough and world generally conspires to
make it tougher. Finally getting your whole team on board should help. Will save any issue discussion or thoughts for other than
email. Keep taking care and, hopefully, the only fireworks this weekend will be in American communities.
Wendy R. Sherman
Albright Stonebridge Group*
1101 New York Avenue, NW
Suite 900
Washin on DC 20005
* On June 25, 2009, Stonebridge International and The Albright Group announced their merger, creating the Albright Stonebridge
Group. For the time being, all contact information remains the same. Once we complete the transition, we will inform you of our new
contact details. We appreciate your patience and look forward to continuing our work with you.
sent from Blackberry"
213;"I am traveling and will be out of the office from Friday, July 31- Wednesday, August 5. I will check emails when possible. If you
need assistance, please contact Anne Fauvre at 202-842-7222 or Thank You."
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
117;"pvervee
Secretary Clinton —
I understand you are going to Kenya next week and while I know the trip is primarily focused on trade issues, I
wanted to flag an issue for you because I know it is near and dear to your heart.
Kenya has one of the strictest anti-abortion laws in Africa — it is illegal unless a woman's life is at risk and
criminalizes both the woman and the provider. Two years ago, Kenyan authorities imprisoned a doctor and
two nurses, falsely accusing them of providing illegal abortions. After a year in prison, the providers were
found innocent and released, but it galvanized the legal and provider community who formed a coalition to
make abortion less restrictive. It will come as no surprise to you that, as a result of their abortion law, Kenya
has one of the highest maternal mortality rates in all of Africa, with an estimated 800 women a day seeking
the procedure, often through dangerous means.
Kenya is restarting a long-stalled constitutional review process and they hope to produce a final Constitution
by next year. Religious groups are on a concerted crusade to include new language in the Constitution which
would codify that ""life begins at conception"". The current Constitution is largely silent on the issue. If this fetal
personhood amendment goes forward, it would place Kenya in the small community of nations with such a
provision. It would clearly mark Kenya as out of stop with countries attempting to institutionalize the African
Union's Maputo Protocol, one of the most progressive regional documents on women, development and
reproductive rights, and with the vast majority of African countries in general. For a country trying to regain
the momentum of stability and success it enjoyed until recently, such a policy imposition would be a
regression for women's rights and for the country writ large.
I went to Kenya last month to work with the coalition that has formed to strategize against the Constitutional
amendment and to work toward a less restrictive abortion law. I also visited several of our clinics and
providers in Nairobi and in nearby villages where Planned Parenthood has programs to train providers in post
abortion care. You have seen this a million times in your travels around the world, so I don't need to tell you
how poignant the stories were of the lives saved and lost, the bravery in standing up to constant government
harassment, and the fear of what this potential Constitutional amendment will mean to the provision of safe
medical services. I know it is asking a lot, but if there is any way that you could draw attention to this issue
when you are in Kenya, you would be even more of my personal hero than you already are. It is our hope that
if Kenya knows the world is watching they may be more careful in how they proceed. Of course we would be
happy to help you in any way if you decide you want to do something on this while you are there. There is also
a Congressional delegation going to Kenya the week of August 8th and we are working on them to have a side
meeting on this issue as well.
As always, thank you so much for all you do. We are all so grateful that you are there! All best, Laurie
Laurie Rubiner
Vice President of Public Policy and Advocacy
Planned Parenthood Federation of America
(202) 973-4863 office"
