SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
197;"Hillary,
I would like to share the outcome of the meeting I had with Netanyahu today. I need some guidance from you urgently
and before I talk to SG (at Netanyahu's short fuse request).
I am reachable through Ops.
Many thanks,
Susan"
197;Many thanks. Will keep you posted.
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
150;"A pouch with all of your call sheets and the schedule in en route to you. Here it is below as well
Also in the pouch are a few read items, and an action memo authorizing the War Powers resolution for Tunisia that the
office would like you to approve today. Ops can send a courier over to pick up the action memo later today.
12:00 UK FM Hague
12:15 Egyptian FM Amr
12:30 Israeli PM Netanyahu
1:15 French FM Fabius
1:30 Saudi FM Saud al-Faisal
2:00 Somali Former Transitional President Sherif
2:15 Libyan PM-elect Abu-Shakour
2:30 Turkish FM Davutoglu
3:00 Somali President Mohamoud (T)
- Moroccan King is still pending.
- NEW CALL King Juan Carlos of Spain called today and offered anytime today or tomorrow. His office relayed that it is a
personal call inquiring after the status of the Embassies in the Middle East We are working on a call sheet
----"
150;"- do you approve the War Powers Act action memo?
- The King of Morocco has not gotten' back to us with a time but ops will try again when its a reasonable hour for the
Moroccans.
- Attorney General Holder has requested to speak with you regarding the Department of Justice's Libya investigation. He
is standing by Would you like to take this tonight?
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739662
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045339"
150;"Thank you.
We are offering 7pm to Holder and waiting to hear if he would like to speak secure.
We likely won't hear from the King for several hours but will keep you posted as soon as we do."
150;He can speak at 7pm. He said that it does not have to be secure. Ops will connect to your residence.
150;"No I'm sorry
I'm actually in Florida for the weekend.
---"
150;"His office called and said that he is available now.
Do you want to take it this morning?
----"
150;"Ops is building the call now.
Do you have the call sheet? We can email if not.
----"
150;"Its Tom DoniIon who wants to speak with you secure. Ops was mistaken. He would like to speak with you asap as he is
leaving shortly.
------"
150;Sorry for the delay. Yes, I planned on being here all week.
150;Of course. Will do
150;"Is at 7pm in the Jockey Club of the Fairfax Hotel
2100 Massachusetts Avenue Northwest"
150;Lauren can meet you there if you decide to go.
150;"Happy New Year to you, too! I'm sorry for the delay in getting back to you.
On menu: As a start, I can make a list of the lunches that he's made so far. Jason is given money advances. I'm not
positive of the total for last year since I came in April but I can have that answer for you by morning. I have skim milk for
you.
On the Human Rights Watch Report: I found it online and will print. It is 96 pages so I can put this in a binder if you'd like.
Parks and Recreation: NBC Thursdays at 8:30pm The Good Wife: CBS Tuesdays at lOpm
And it is a huge honor to work for you. I learn so much every day and I am so grateful for this unforgettable experience.
Thank you!"
150;Will do.
150;Yes I am. Huma is here too
150;"Bagley and Tauscher are all set with their tickets.
Mikulski will get here close to your arrival time so you might walk in with her - pls let me know if that's a problem.
Pelosi is coming separately and is seated close to you."
150;Thanks. Tauscher here. Mikulski around the corner. Will see you soon.
150;"Hanley, Monica R <HanleyMR©state.gov>
Wednesday, June 23, 2010 10:41 PM
Huma Abedin
She unfortunately can't come this week - she's away until Tuesday. Will see if Tuesday night or Wednesday morning
works with your schedule."
150;"Hanley, Monica R <HanleyMR@state.gov>
Wednesday, June 23, 2010 10:41 PM
Re:
Yes she's in Hawaii until Tuesday morning. She can do Tuesday evening ot Wednesday if that works for you"
150;"Will lock in for tonight.
We spoke to Marianne about coming in on the 8th."
150;I'm not. I'm in new york now. Sorry.
150;"8:15 am DEPART Private Residence *En route State Department
8:25 am ARRIVE State Department
8:25 am PRESIDENTIAL DAILY BRIEFING
8:30 am Secretary's Office
8:30 am DAILY SMALL STAFF MEETING
8:45 am Secretary's Office
8:45 am DAILY SENIOR STAFF MEETING
9:15 am Secretary's Conference Room
9:30 am (t) PHONE CALL w/UN AMBASSADOR SUSAN RICE (T)
10:00 am Secretary's Office
10:00 am BILATERAL w/SRI LANKAN MINISTER OF EXTERNAL
10:30 am AFFAIRS G.L. PEIRIS
10:30 am PRESS PRE-BRIEF
10:35 am Secretary's Office
10:35 am JOINT PRESS AVAILABILITY w/SRI LANKA FM PEIRIS
10:50 am Treaty Room, 7'h Floor
11:00 am MEETING w/QUINN MEACHAM
11:30 am Secretary's Office
11:30 am MEETING w/CONGRESSMEN ELIOT ENGEL AND CONNIE MACK
12:00 pm Secretary's Outer Office
12:00 pm OFFICE TIME
12:30 pm Secretary's Office
12:30 pm MEETING w/SPECIAL ENVOY SCOTT GRATION
1:00 pm Secretary's Office
1:00 pm MEETING w/CONGRESSWOMAN LORETTA SANCHEZ
1:30 pm Secretary's Outer Office
1:30 pm WEEKLY DEVELOPMENT MEETING
2:30 pm Secretary's Outer Office
2:30 pm OFFICE TIME
3:15 pm Secretary's Office
3:30pm MEETING w/DENNIS ROSS
4:15pm Secretarys Office
TBD DEPART State Dept *En Route Private Residence
TBD ARRIVE Private Residence
###"
150;Sorry for the delay. Abt 15 minutes away. We hit some traffic in new jersey.
150;I'm at the post office but Huma has this printed for you.
150;"Will do
And have email printed for you"
150;"his vote - The Hill
done"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
153;"Neera Tanden
Saturday, March 28, 2009 12:37 AM
Re:
B6"
153;"This was on Paul Krugman's blog yesterday. I, for one, enjoyed it. Hope you're very well Hillary.
May 19, 2009, 7:35 am
Ahem
Politico:
Health care could soon go the way of the automobile, with users having no choice but to buy
insurance coverage.
Within four years, every American could be required to own health insurance or pay their way
through tax penalties. The odds of such a sea change rose last week when chief Democratic and
Republican Senate negotiators on a health care bill acknowledged that many on the Finance
Committee considered the so-called individual mandate essential to lower insurance costs for
those who already have coverage.
President Barack Obama didn't embrace the individual mandate during the campaign, which
means he would essentially start from scratch in terms of selling the idea to voters.
The mandate was a central policy difference with Hillary Clinton, who argued that a mandate
was the only way to achieve universal coverage. Obama disagreed, saying enough people would
purchase insurance voluntarily if the costs could be brought down.
Progressive policy experts widely agreed that Obama's plan would have left out about 15 million
people. Clinton, with an assist from New York Times columnist Paul Krugman, regularly
assailed Obama for his no-mandate position.
Actually, I don't care who gets credit, as long as we actually get universal health care."
153;"Barack Obama may support insurance mandate
By CARRIE BUDOFF BROWN I 6/3/09 3:42 PM EDT
Updated: 6/3/09 11:22 PM EDT
As a presidential candidate, Barack Obama scoffed at Hillary Rodham Clinton's proposal to require people to
buy health insurance.
""(If) they can't afford it, they just don't get it,"" Obama said during the primary, arguing that a mandate would
not work unless insurance costs were lowered first.
For the first time, Obama confirmed Wednesday that he plans to stake out a different position as president.
In a letter to two leading Democratic senators, Obama said he could support a mandate on individuals to buy
coverage, as long as Congress exempted those who could not afford it. This marks a shift from his stance during
the campaign, when he tussled repeatedly with Clinton on the issue. She proposed an individual mandate, and
he did not.
""I share the goal of ending lapses and gaps in coverage that make us less healthy and drive up everyone's costs,
and I am open to your ideas on shared responsibility,"" Obama wrote. ""But I believe if we are going to make
people responsible for owning health insurance, we must make health care affordable.""
""If we do end up with a system where people are responsible for their own insurance, we need to provide a
hardship waiver to exempt Americans who cannot afford it,"" Obama wrote.
Detailing his positions on various health care proposals for the first time as president, Obama also said
Americans should be able to choose between public and private insurance plans in a reformed health care
system.
""I strongly believe that Americans should have the choice of a public health insurance option operating
alongside private plans,"" he wrote. ""This will give them a better range of choices, make the health care market
more competitive, and keep insurance companies honest.""
He offered qualified support for a mandate on employers to provide insurance or pay a fee to the government.
Employers ""have a responsibility to support health insurance for their employees,"" Obama wrote, but small
businesses should be exempt.
Obama's positions on these issues were not entirely surprising, but his decision to weigh in before
congressional Democratic leaders released a single bill was unexpected. Prior to the letter, Obama and his aides
had declined to say specifically where he stood on various issues, including the public plan and individual
mandate, saying they wanted Congress to lead the way in writing a bill.
But Democrats have been anxious for the president to take a more public stance, and the letter provides the
guidance that many in Congress had been craving as House and Senate committees move closer to releasing
draft bills.
""The president says get it done. Get it done right because we only get one chance,"" said Sen. Barbara Mikulski
(D-Md.), a member of the Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee. ""The letter essentially
synthesizes what the president is saying.""
He outlined the parameters in a letter to Senate Finance Chairman Max Baucus (D-Mont.) and Health,
Education, Labor and Pensions Committee Chairman Ted Kennedy (D-Mass.).
Obama's endorsement of a public insurance option could boost the controversial proposal and serve as catalyst
for the Democratic base as the president kicks off a grassroots campaign Saturday.
""It's clear that the Republican resistance to a public plan hasn't softened President Obama's support for one,""
Sen. Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.) said in a statement. ""This strengthens the hand of those of us advocating for a
public option, which is the only way to keep the private insurers' feet to the fire.""
Despite almost uniform opposition from Republicans on the public plan, the president wrote in the letter that he
remains ""hopeful that many Republicans"" would back an overhaul bill.
Sen. Chuck Grassley (R-Iowa), the ranking Republican on the Finance Committee, struck an optimistic tone in
a statement, saying the letter ""doesn't draw lines in the sand,"" and ""is helpful because of his statements that
reform legislation needs to have bipartisan support.""
However, the letter is likely to incite opponents, who have been frustrated by Obama's lack of specifics.
Indeed, on Thursday morning, Conservatives for Patients' Rights will begin airing a new TV ad called
""Bulldozer,"" which says a ""government-run plan"" will drive private insurers out of business and eliminate
consumer choices.
Back to top
Read more: ""Barack Obama may support insurance mandate - Carrie Budoff Brown - POLITICO.com"" -
http://www.politico.com/news/stories/0609/23298.html#ixzz0HQhr4KMx&A"
153;"Sorry to flood your email, but I couldn't resist sending this to you from Ben Smith
A year later, Hillary wins
A year ago today, the final set of primaries made official the foregone conclusion that Barack Obama had won
the primary, and Hillary Clinton lost it.
There's far too much going on today to dwell on an anniversary, but it does seem worth noting one particular
piece of news in its light: On the central health care policy debate of the Democratic Primary -- which was, to
be fair, conducted within a fairly narrow frame -- Obama appears to have conceded today to a Senate plan likely
to more closely resemble Clinton's.
In a dense, careful letter to Ted Kennedy and Max Baucus, Obama offered his principles for a health care plan
and conceded on a central point: He is now open to an individual mandate, which he campaigned against, and
which is now being talked about by Senators of both parties with the buzzword ""shared responsibility.""
Obama still backs a ""hardship waiver"" for people unable to afford the mandate -- which is consistent with the
core of his objection to the mandate. But what he cast as a principled difference of approach -- was the problem
merely that people couldn't afford insurance? or something more? -- seems to have been conceded.
Here's the relevant paragraph:
I understand the Committees are moving towards a principle of shared responsibility -- making
every American responsible for having health insurance coverage, and asking that employers
share in the cost. I share the goal of ending lapses and gaps in coverage that make us less healthy
and drive up everyone's costs, and I am open to your ideas on shared responsibility. But I believe
if we are going to make people responsible for owning health insurance, we must make health
care affordable. If we do end up with a system where people are responsible for their own
insurance, we need to provide a hardship waiver to exempt Americans who cannot afford it. In
addition, while I believe that employers have a responsibility to support health insurance for their
employees, small businesses face a number of special challenges in affording health benefits and
should be exempted.
B6
B6
By Ben Smith 07:51 PM"
153;"Neera Tanden
Monday, November 1, 2010 11:35 PM
Hi Hillary,
I hope you are enjoying your travels. I'm trying to keep the Go, Fight, Win spirit, but I must confess,
it's a bit hard.
I promise I will do this rarely, if at all, in the future, but I am once again sending my column. This
time I am doing so because it references you and also because it created some buzz related to the
primaries.
Looking forward to seeing you in December.
Neera
PO,!T1CS
The Female Factor
Jcw the Democrats can regain women 3 faith—and fightfor their interests.
era 111""(leP1
MORE FROM TH!S AUTHOR
Neera Tanden: How °barna Can Win the Battle Over the Economy
What Will It Tate For the Left to Rally Behind Obama Again?
Tanden: Why Liberal Dissatisfaction With Obarna Is Way Overblown
Last week, as Democratic candidates across the country reached out to female voters in the final swing
before Election Day. the White House released a report on how
The report highlights the Obama's administration's efforts and accomplishments on behalf of
.‘vomen's economic success—small business expansion that helps female business owners, jobs tax credits
that help women (and lnera) find jobs, and laws to enforce equal pay for equal work„ among other
initiatives. Yet the report passed with little fanfare and even less media attention—like so many other
aspects of the president's remarkably pro-woman policy agenda.
It's almost tragic how this agenda has fallen under the radar during Obama's first two years in office. We
hear too often about abortion's controversial role in the year-long health care negotiations—but not
enough about other women-centered issues that, after being promoted by activists for years, have finally
made it into legislation. These go beyond the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act. The American Reinvestment
and Recovery Act dramatically expanded child care provisions and Head Start. The health cafe bill
contained over $i billion to support nurses visiting new and expectant mothers at home, a program that
women's groups and economists alike have championed as a smart investment. An even bigger victory is
the CLASS Act, also part of the health care bill, which provides a basic cash benefit to people (often
women) who are taking care of the elderly at home.
Yet I can probably count on my hand the number of people, including women, who actually know about
these new laws. Amid the din of bad news about the economy and misinformation about health care
reform, these policies don't stand a chance, sadly, of getting much media coverage. it doesn't help that the
Democrats haven't done enough to shine a public spotlight on them.
But they could soon be lost in an even deeper abyss: The rampant individualism and free-market
fundamentalism support-ed by the Republican Party, which seems on the 1
.Drecipice of controlling -die
House and possibly the Senate, could undo these initiatives entirely. What's more, the new Republiicpm
wave could mute the voice of women and their most important advocates on the national stage.
The Ten Parties, fueled by wealthy multimillionaires, are running extreme candidates—including
women like Sharron Angie and Christine O'Donnell—who want to get rid of policies that help women the
most. If the health care bill gets repealed, for instance, the new provisions for !ong-term care would go out
the window, making decades worth of advocacy work moot.
But the Tea Parties threaten women in other ways, too. .ff the Republicans take back the _House, the
Democratic Party will lose one of its most powerful women: Speaker Nanc,
„' Pelosi, who currently has more
clout than any woman on the other side of the aisle, Meanwhile, Republicans like Sarah Palin and Nikki
Haley will only gain political power—and, with that .power, attract more attention to their extreme views.
If these Republicans become the nation's loudest voices of seemingly strong women, that could portend
for a shift among younger women's allegiances toward the Republican Party and its platform.
Already, despite the stark realities about what Republicans will likely take away from women once. they are
in power, we are seeing rumbling of such a change: After forming the backbone of Democratic majorities
for years, working-class women are wobbling in theii support the the Obama administration. According to
a fron. last week, while femaie college graduates savor Democratic over
Republican control (56 percent to 36 percent), women With only some college or a vocational education
are running almost even k A • '
Perhaps, in their growing economic anxiety, this group of women wafits to throw out incumbents they
perceive have not sufficiently focused on their economic progress. But, of course, if the media paid more
attention to Obama's pro-woman agenda—and both advocates and policymakers did more to broadcast
it—these key voters would know that the Democrats, not Republicans, are the politicians who have their
interests in mind.
Democrats can't let this continue—they can't allow Republicans to brand themselves as the party of strong
female leaders, or allow women to gradually become a constituency of the right. That's why it's critical to
have standout women in the party. If Pelosi loses, is there a powerful enough Democratic woman to
compete with these Republicans in the national spotlight? There's Hillary Clinton who, as Secretary of
State, has sent a powerful signal to the country and the world about the importance of female leadership in
the Obama administration, But, as a technically non-partisan international figure, Hillary won't be able to
do public battle with the rising right,
Perhaps a Governor Sink—if she wins—in Florida could be among a new class of strong female Democrats.
The °barna administration would also do well to elevate v.,/onien in the exe.cutive branch and turn public
attention to those who are already there.
In addition to •presenting women as the face of the patty, Democrats must focus on issues like long-term
care, child care, and equal pay, all of which could rise to the legislatle fore in the coming months.
Republicans will likely directly attack or cut beck investments in these initiatives. When this happens, the
White House (and Democrats more broadly) would be wise to e.:;olain what ili niean for women if these
i •
nitiatives are gutted or lost—and to fight tooth and nail to make s-a•.e that doesn't happen.
If it doesn't take these steps, the Democratic Party could lose ts grasr on a cr3-ni‘al. Pveii central 7-,eit of its
coalition. And women, in the long run, would suffer under conservative laws that parrot family -values, but
do nothing to value families.
Neera Tanden is the chiTcoperatina office, of Center for . ozriefn P—oc,-ress, SJ.e served in the
ObalRe. and C:-
:;qton adininistrUHOTZS.
.■1?;;RT :•IAR7.0 0;n:cr,,"
153;"Neera Tanden
Friday, November 5, 2010 11:03 PM
H
I don't know where he got that you would have pulled the plug on health care, but other parts...
htto://y,mew. wash i natalDI:0)st. co rnPrtio-dynicontentla rii d el201. Oil1/05/AR2010110505214. h %.! r!"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
9;"Madam Secretary,
Shapiro, Andrew J <ShapiroA@state.gov>
Friday, August 14, 2009 6:17 PM
H
Sullivan, Jacob
Colombia Defense Cooperation agreement
Our chief negotiator for the Defense Cooperation Agreement (DCA) just reported that a provisional agreement has been
reached with the Colombians. It will have to go through translation and other scrubbing over the next couple of weeks
before its ready to be signed but this should be good news for your proposed meeting with Foreign Minister Bermudez
next week. Please let me know if you have any questions.
Andrew
7"
9;Understood about expediting finalizing the agreement. I am not scheduled to see Bermudez tomorrow.
9;I'm checking and will get right back to you.
9;"DCA negotiations are still on for week after next (11-13 Aug), as requested.
Amb Barco called to request that we slide right one day (13,14 Aug). They requested this based on a visit of Mexican
President Calderon - who will visit Bogota (10-12 Aug). The dep FM and some MinDef officials want to be in Bogota for
Calderon's visit.
Let me know if you have any other questions."
9;"I will be out of the office until Tuesday, October 13 with limited access to e-mail. If you need immediate assistance,
please contact Pat Grimes at 202-647-9022.
Andrew J. Shapiro
Assistant Secretary for Political-Military Affairs Department of State
2201 C Street, NW
Washington, DC 20520"
9;"I will be out of the office until Friday September 3 with limited access to e-mail. If you need immediate assistance, please
contact Nadia Brown at 202-647-9022.
Andrew J. Shapiro
Assistant Secretary for Political-Military Affairs Department of State
2201 C Street, NW
Washington, DC 20520"
9;"Madam Secretary,
Thank you so much for making the time to address the reception celebrating the passage of the Defense Trade
Cooperation Treaties with the UK and Australia. Everyone in the room put forward tremendous effort towards achieving
the treaties passage and they appreciated the recognition of their efforts that you provided.
I'm working on a memo to you that will summarize PM's achievements during the first 18 months of my tenure as well
as the Bureau's priorities going forward. Once I send it up to you, I'll work with Eric, Jake, Cheryl, etc. on setting up a
time with you to discuss to ensure that we are capturing your priorities.
Thanks again.
Best, Andrew"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
12;"Valenzuela, Arturo A <ValenzuelaAA@state.gov>
Saturday, December 5, 2009 3:46 PM
Re: Columbia, Brazil and Honduras
Thanks very much for contacting me-- I just got off a plane in Florida on my way to Mexico for my first visit and
consultations w Carlos Pascual. Return Wed morning.
1.4(B)
1.4(D)
B1
On Honduras we are ok-- despite complications. We maintain a principled position (no to coup), with a realistic one
based on need to have an end game for Honduras. Our formulation that election was necessary but not sufficient —
succeeded in shifting dynamic in many other countries and pushing back on erroneous press reports alleging
administration vacillation.
B5
Best regards,
Arturo"
12;
12;"Thanks very much. Will do. Have a good weekend.
Best, Arturo"
12;"Valenzuela, Arturo A <ValenzuelaAA@state.gov>
Friday, October 1, 2010 7:34 AM
Gonzalez, Juan S; Sullivan, Jacob J; Abedin, Huma; Steinberg, James B; Burns, William J
From Arturo - Correa Rescued in Ecuador
Madame Secretary: After a tense day in which President Correa was slightly injured at noon by rioting and
striking police, and later was barred from leaving the hospital by the same, the army finally rescued him at
9pm last night. Some military units, including the Navy unit in Guayaquil appeared to support the police. The
police also occupied the national congress. As the rescue took place, the head of the Ecuadoran Joints Chiefs
of Staff issued a statement supporting the president, and noting that the armed forces respect the rule of law
""in which the President [Rafael Correa] is the maximum authority of the three branches."" Things are now
calm.
Reaction in the hemisphere was one of deep concern. The OAS adopted a resolution; South American
presidents at the call of UNASUR travelled to Buenos Aires and are likely to go on to Quito to support
Correa. Several, including Garcia and Santos, called Correa. Zapatero also spoke with him. Moratinos tried to
reach you at around 6pm last evening to convey that news, I took the call.
As you know, we issued a statement of support for Correa. I also gave an interview to CNN in Spanish, which
was re-played frequently. I strongly recommend that you call Correa today to reiterate U.S. support for his
government and to wish him well.
He will appreciate it but, more broadly, it sends a signal that the United States supports the constitutional
order and rejects any attempt to undermine it. Chavez in Buenos Aires predictably declared that we were
behind the unrest. We have prepared a call sheet for you.
Regards,
Arturo"
12;"Thanks so much for doing this. I will follow up w a call to FM Patifio who I now understand was also injured after I spoke
to him yesterday."
12;"Madame Secretary:
I'd like to update you on our efforts to engage with Bolivia.
You engaged personally and through Maria Echaveste as we've tried to think and act creatively to extract positives from
a difficult starting point. Echaveste visited Bolivia in June and September 2009, and I traveled there this June to
underline our commitment to better relations; you met with FM Choquehuanca at the OAS GA in Lima later that month;
and Labor Secretary Solis and Maria Otero traveled to President Morales' inauguration in January 2010.
Best Regards,
Arturo"
12;"Valenzuela, Arturo A <ValenzuelaAA@state.gov>
Saturday, August 28, 2010 2:05 PM
Valmoro, Lona J; Huma Abedin
Re: From Arturo re Bolivia
Happy to discuss. I am on leave in Florida--- returning to DC Wednesday the 1st around 2:30 pm-- could come in after
3:00. Am available any time Thursday afternoon or Friday B6
the 3rd. Best, Arturo"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
94;I am in back-to-back meetings on Friday, October 2, and will have only limited access to e-mails.
94;"1.4(B)
1.4(D)
B1
Jeffrey Feltman"
94;"Feltman, Jeffrey D <FeltmanJD@state.gov>
Saturday, October 3, 2009 4:30 PM
H; Mitchell, George J
Re: Phone call report
B6
Copying in the email the Senator usually checks on the weekend. (Senator, the message below is from the Secretary.)
1
1
B"
94;I am out of the office, back on November 30.
94;"B1
1.4(B)
1.4(D)
Yes. (Sorry for late response -- been driving in Thanksgiving traffic to Ohio.)
Jeffrey Feltman"
94;I am on official travel until sometime on December 18. I will have periodic access to e-mails on this system.
94;"Feltman, Jeffrey D <FeltmanJD©state.gov>
Saturday, December 12, 2009 11:29 AM
H; Koh, Harold Hongju
Re: Guinea
I have left a message on the phone number of my French counterpart. I am sure he'll call me back, as he always does.
Jeffrey Feltman"
94;I am on official travel until mid-day on 2/19. I will check messages by Blackberry as frequently as possible.
94;"Madam Secretary, Tamara Wittes and Alex Djerassi from NEA have been working with Megan this morning on what we
in NEA, at least (and obviously we defer to you!), see as the real opportunity of the speech: to lay out a simple theme
about Cairo that has somehow gotten lost --
Jeffrey Feltman
Assistant Secretary
Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs
Department of State
202-647-7209"
94;"Sure. In touch with Claire about timing.
Jeffrey Feltman
Assistant Secretary
Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs
Department of State
202-647-7209"
94;"I am out of the office on travel from COB 9/9 until sometime on 9/17. Then I will be on travel again from 9/18 until
sometime either 9/29 or 9/30. I will check messages on this system periodically."
94;"I will have with me a big file on this; I raised the case on the margins of Aboul-Gheit's meeting with you on August 30.
We will work with CA to have a letter prepared to take.
The case is typical in that the U.S. parent has custody that the Egyptian courts have not yet recognized (case is pending).
But it's atypical in that it's the mother who took the kids to Egypt and the father who is in the U.S. We're in touch with
Senator Kerry's office on this.
Jeffrey Feltman
Assistant Secretary
Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs
Department of State
202-647-7209"
94;I am on official travel and should be back in the office on Monday, December 6. I will check this system intermittently.
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
113;"Campbell, Kurt M <CampbelIKM@state.gov>
Saturday, July 11, 2009 9:43 PM
Re: N. Korea
Secretary Clinton -"
113;"Thank you Madame Secretary the information you received from Jakarta is consistent with what we have now heard
from Indonesians. Scott and I just held an agency wide review of our collective Pacific wide efforts to date and where we
both need more information and where we are prepared to do more. Our team is doing a full accounting of every effort
to date and we will have this to you by mid afternoon. We are awaiting word from Luzon and I anticipate that we will
need to do much more there and in parts of Indonesia in the days ahead. We will be in touch with our interagency
colleagues throughout the day and will update you again accordingly. Thank you for your efforts and the readouts. I will
also do follow ups as you request. Best Kurt"
113;"Thanks Madame Secretary -- we are working this on Jim's schedule currently I believe but the Admiral really wants you
to do this. We certainly want more attention to the still very tentative military dialogue between US and PRC and
Admiral Owens is very much engaged on this. It's your call but your involvement would certainly help this nascent
initiative gain altitude. Best Kurt"
113;"Hope you are well this morning. I will be in the hold room if you need any assistance. We had a fun dinner with Phillippe
and Jake last night. Wish you were with us! Best Kurt"
113;"Campbell, Kurt M <CampbelIKM@state.gov>
Monday, April 26, 2010 6:33 AM
Re: Futenma
1.4(B)
1.4(D)
B1
Thanks Madame Secretary in HK on the way to Tokyo.
yvill know more in Tokyo tomorrow and will
report to you directly. Best Kurt"
113;Forward deployed diplomacy taking root in commentary from Hawaii speech. We will use it more in next statements. Kurt
113;"Thanks Madame Secretary --
Kagan also had an unusually supportive piece on Friday that prominently mentioned your role on Asia
He built Singapore from nothing and his book is pretty damn inspirational on that front.
I leave for Asia early Monday and will check in from the road. Thanks and best Kurt"
113;"Tom and Larry doing fine in early meetings here in Beijing. Tom has highlighted critical role of S and ED. Larry somewhat
discursive and academic on global economic issues. China intent on a good Hu summit in DC likely scheduled for January
2011. Dai agrees to meet with S in third city in Fall -- will work on details. More later Kurt"
113;Thank you Madame Secretary. Best from Beijing. Kurt
113;a Partnership
113;"Can debrief or discuss at your convenience Madame Secretary. Ops can find me at any time. Will be out of pocket 1 to 4.
Thanks Kurt"
113;
113;Madame Secretary -- a very sophisticated and supportive voice from Singapore. Kurt
113;"We are updating for the morning and getting from Washington forward leaning language on damns. Will have at 815
staff. Thanks Kurt"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
168;"Crowley, Philip J <CrowleyPJ@state.gov>
RELEASE IN PART
B6
Here is what we have come up with as agreed language from Bob, Eric, Mike, Melanne, Lissa and me. This can be used
for the letter and for press guidance. Melanne will send a letter to the GOSL and perhaps the UN Permrep. We will ask
the Post to release the letter to journalists in Colombo once it is received. I will schedule a press briefing at the Foreign
Press Center early this week, which will attract a good number of Asian journalists, and make sure the question is asked
so we can put it in proper context. We will have it for guidance in the Main State briefing if asked. PJ
BEGIN TEXT
Questions have been raised regarding remarks by Secretary of State Hillary Clinton on September 30 before the United
Nations Security Council on the adoption of a resolution to combat sexual violence in armed conflict. In her statement,
she said that we have seen rape used as a tactic before in a number of countries, including Sri Lanka.
Regarding the Secretary's reference to Sri Lanka in her address, we want to be clear. Over the course of the difficult
conflict between the government of Sri Lanka and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE), stretching into this
decade, the State Department as well as credible human rights organizations reported numerous cases of rape and
sexual violence in Sri Lanka, particularly acts committed against women held in detention by the government. This was
the basis for the Secretary's statement. At the same time, in the most recent phase of the conflict, from 2006 to 2009,
though we remained deeply concerned about reports of extrajudicial killings, disappearances and mistreatment of
detainees, we have not received reports that rape and sexual abuse were used as tools of war, as they clearly have in
other conflict areas around the world. We hope that this clarification puts the issue in its proper context.
These questions should not detract from the specific actions that Sri Lanka needs to take now. With the end of the
military conflict, Secretary Clinton believes strongly that Sri Lanka must focus to the future and move forward on the
promotion of peace and the protection of human rights. The government of Sri Lanka should release more than 250,000
displaced persons who are still confined in camps, and lead a process of genuine political and social reconciliation. The
United States stands ready to assist and support the people of Sri Lanka with these critical challenges."
168;"Crowley, Philip J <CrowleyPJ@state.gov>
Sunday, October 4, 2009 10:30 AM
H; preine
Re: Sri Lanka
Working it now; will provide to media as soon as we have delivery confirmatio. Should be by early this afternoon. RI"
168;"If you haven't read it yet, I commend the series that starts today in the NYT regarding his captivity.
Have a great Sunday. PJ"
168;"Your arrival in Kabul landed the front page picture in the NYT and sparked an on-line poll in Huff Post about your coat. At
last check, its favorability rating was 77 percent. Safe travels back. PJ"
168;"We had a little fun at today's briefing. Our friends in the media have been bugging us regarding your holiday plans, so
we announced your departure from Washington in the following way:
""...And finally, a few of you have asked about the schedule of the Secretary of State over the next few days. I can tell
you this morning the Secretary departed Washington and she stopped at the North Pole for an important bilateral
meeting with a well known international figure. During the meeting, in a formal demarche, sung to the tune of Twelve
Days of Christmas, the Secretary outlined her aspirations for the new year. They include, and feel free to hum
along: open and accountable governments, Middle East negotiations, more civilians in Afghanistan, empowerment of
women, fewer nuclear weapons, respect for human rights, resolution of historic grievances, treaties through the United
States Senate, Six-Party Talks, dialogue with Iran, enough food for people of the world to eat, climate change legislation,
and lastly, a championship for the Boston Red Sox. Okay, that last one's not on her list, but Harold Koh and I thought it
was important that we mention that here.""
It is a privilege to be a part of your team. We wish you, the President and Chelsea all the best during the holiday season
and look forward to great achievements in 2010, with one tiny exception.
Pi"
168;"Thank you. I will spend next week reviewing the recent IG report of my bureau. Gave us good marks on the technical
side of what we do, but there is definitely work to be done on our organizational structure, some leadership issues in
specific offices and how we interact and communicate across our various functions. On the planning side, thanks to the
2010 look ahead memos that the bureaus prepared for you, we will be more effective in creating media and outreach
opportunities because our focus will be not just on this week, but looking ahead to the month and quarter as well. We
have been briefing-centric in the past. We will be creating more channels to communicate our messages. I know Judith
spoke with you on Monday about greater emphasis on international media. We will be restructuring part of my
operation to be able to do that. Going through these issues, I'll either be well-rested or exhausted, but I am looking
forward to 2010.
PJ"
168;"Madam Secretary, good evening. I just received a question
PJ"
168;Will do. PJ
168;"Already doing so; will intensify.
PJ"
168;"Madame Secretary, April Ryan asked me to pass along to you that Dorothy Height has taken a turn for the worse and is
not expected to survive long.
Pi"
168;"We are characterizing it this way. Our only rep in the chair, a working-level officer, walked out with many other
countries in solidarity over the first of a series of accusations in his speech. We are trying to keep our first response
limited. Later we can add more specificity.
PJ"
168;"Unfortunately, we just received our first news query on the North Korea consular visit, out of the region. We
are working this issue with EAP but will likely acknowledge the fact when asked at the briefing today.
pJ"
168;"Importance:
Crowley, Philip J <CrowleyRl@state.gov>
Thursday, September 9, 2010 2:18 PM
Abedin, Huma; Mills, Cheryl D; Verma, Richard R; Sullivan, Jacob J
FW: Those who have denounced
High
Madame Secretary, here is what we have found thus far in terms of Republican voices encouraging the pastor to
reconsider.
PJ
Denounced the Koran Burning:
Sen. McCain on Twitter:
""Pastor Jones' threats to burn the Koran will put American service men/women in danger - for their sake
please don't do it!""
(http://twittercom/SenJohnMcCain)
Sarah Palin on Twitter and Facebook: ""Koran Burning Is Insensitive, Unnecessary; Pastor Jones, Please Stand
Down""
(http://twittercom/SarahPalinUSA)
See Facebook statement: http://www.facebook.com/note.php?note_id=427813493434
Rep. Boehner on ABC News: ""just because you have a right to do something in America does not mean it is
the right thing to do....We're a nation of religious freedom. We're also a nation of tolerance. And I think in the
name of tolerance, people ought to really think about the kind of actions they're taking...I just think that it's
not wise to do this in the face of what our country really represents,"" said Boehner.
http://news.smh.com.au/breaking-news-world/mccain-pleads-against-koran-burning-20100910-153g0.html
Gov. Barbour via ABC News: ""I do not think well of the idea of burning anybody's Koran, or Bible, Book of
Mormon or anything else.... I don't think there's any excuse for it,""
(http://blogs.abcnews.com/thenote/2010/09/gov-barbour-no-excuse-for-koran-burning-stirring-up-anti-
muslim-sentiments-a-distraction-for-gop.html)
Gov. Pawlenty via Minnesota Public Radio Report: ""Gov. Tim Pawlenty says he doesn't think burning the
Quran is a good idea, but he's not specifically calling on a Florida pastor to cancel a planned weekend protest.
The Republican governor, who is viewed as a likely presidential candidate in 2012, commented on the Quran
controversy today at an airport news conference before leaving on an Asian trade mission. Pawlenty said that
people have a legal right to burn books, but that doesn't mean it's wise. He stopped short of saying the
burning shouldn't go forward.""
(http://minnesota.publicradio.orecollections/specialkolumnsjpolinautfarchive/2010/09/pawlenty says q.sh
tml)
Former Gov. Romney via Politico: ""Burning the Quran is wrong on every level,"" the former Massachusetts
governor said in a statement to POLITICO. ""It puts troops in danger and it violates a founding principle of our
Republic.""
(http://www.politico.corn/blogs/bensmith/0910/Romney against Quran burning.html)"
168;"Crowley, Philip J <CrowleyR1@state.gov>
Friday, December 24, 2010 4:21 PM
Mills, Cheryl D; McHale, Judith A; Koh, Harold Hongju; Kennedy, Patrick F; Verma,
Richard R; Sullivan, Jacob J; Reines, Philippe I; Goldberg, Philip S; Burns, William J;
Steinberg, James B; Hormats, Robert D; Posner, Michael H; Abedin, Huma
WikiLeaks Update
Madame Secretary, first of all, Merry Christmas. I trust you, the President and Chelsea will have a special holiday.
PJ"
168;"I can think of several folks for you to toss that wrench at!
This email is UNCLASSIFIED"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
169;"Gordon, Philip H <GordonPH@state.gov>
Monday, November 2, 2009 10:18 AM
H
■
RE:
Many thanks. Got the call readout.
Will get team focused on using the period between now and Athens (OSCE) to do so.
Safe travels,
Phil"
169;"Madame Secretary —
Many thanks for taking the time to meet the family today. They were thrilled to meet you (and I enjoyed the
break from the Ukrainians...)
Best,
Phil"
169;"Gordon, Philip H <GordonPH@state.gov>
Sunday, January 31, 2010 7:22 PM
H; Tauscher, Ellen 0
Sullivan, Jacob J
RE: NSS invites
Phil"
169;"Just got word POTUS has agreed to host NATO summit in US in spring 2012. Alliance expected to agree and
announce this in Lisbon."
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
171;"Crowley, Philip J <CrowleyPJ@state.gov>
Friday, November 12, 2010 9:12 AM
Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Feltman, Jeffrey D; Reines, Philippe I
Jackson Diehl Editorial
Madame Secretary, as we understood on Wednesday, our conscious decision not to mention domestic Egyptian issues
publicly was noticed at the Post editorial board. I had multiple exchanges with Jackson over the course of the day
yesterday. Based on your colloquy with Aboul-Gheit and Jeff s follow-up, we are quoted in the piece which you see in
the clips as having a direct and spirited exchange with the Egyptians and that there was no misunderstanding of the
importance that we attach to these issues. So in the end Jackson grants some credit for the discussion, and we agree to
disagree on the degree to which this discussion should be public.
PJ
SBU
This email is UNCLASSIFIED."
171;"Madame Secretary, thought you might appreciate this.
PJ
This email is UNCLASSIFIED."
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
180;"All State nominees were voice voted out of Committee without debate this afternoon.
They included:
E. Tauscher
A.Shapiro
K. Campbell
E. Goosby
B.Jenkins
E. Schwartz"
180;"Verma, Richard R WermaRR@state.gov>
Tuesday, June 23, 2009 7:12 PM
Abedin, Huma
Re: Follow-up information regarding legislation mentioned in Senator Voinovich's call to the
Secretary (S. 321 and S. 840)
Got it. We are evaluating how best to respond."
180;Susan called Payne today. We have also sent paper to Payne's africa subcommittee staff director.
180;"The additional calls to be made today by Susan and Scott are listed below. It is our understanding that all these calls
were made (though a couple of house members were unavailable). We have also been in touch with all leadership and
key committee staff in the house and senate and sent them the relevant fact sheet/white paper on the new policy.
Ambassador Rice: Feingold■ Leahy■ Payne
Gration: Lowey■ Ros-Lehtinen■ Lee■ Capuano■ McCaul■ Isakson■ Corker■ Brownback■ Wolf"
180;"Relatively positive feedback. Some concern over the increased engagement and lingering concern over Scott's previous
comments. If he sticks to the agreed upon points tomorrow at the presser and in the follow up with the NGOs, think the
roll out will be well received, even with Friday nite's leak."
180;From Lula Davis regarding Shannon and Valenzuela. Thanks for calling DeMint. It made the difference.
180;"Think your calls to House members made all the difference. Close, but good result. Reid still waiting on cbo scoring
before taking up senate bill. Could slide at least a week, maybe more."
180;"John Murtha Hospitalized:
David Rogers December 14, 2009 12:03 PM EST
With the annual Pentagon budget bill due on the House floor this week, a familiar face may be missing.Rep. John
Murtha, chairman of the House Appropriations defense panel, was hospitalized Sunday night because of abdominal
pains. The 77-year-old Pennsylvania Democrat had been feeling ill with what he thought last week was swine flu but the
hospitalization appears related to his gall bladder.""He's currently resting and doing well,"" his office said. But a major
committee hearing Murtha had planned for Tuesday on the growing U.S. military commitment in Afghanistan has been
postponed"
180;"Verma, Richard R <VermaRR©state.gov>
Wednesday, December 16, 2009 9:48 PM
Fw: We have informed our cloakroom that we lift the hold on Shannon nomination
Hold on Tom was lifted. Thanks for making the calls. Trying to get him thru as quickly as possible before another hold
emerges."
180;"Verma, Richard R <VermaRR@state.gov>
Wednesday, December 16, 2009 10:06 PM
Re: We have informed our cloakroom that we lift the hold on Shannon nomination
Yes, I sold my soul to George Lemieux today. I am not proud of it."
180;"Verma, Richard R <VermaRR@state.gov>
Wednesday, December 16, 2009 10:27 PM
Re: We have informed our cloakroom that we lift the hold on Shannon nomination
I suspect they would prefer more $ for Little Havana."
180;"Verma, Richard R <VermaRR@state.gov>
Wednesday, December 16, 2009 10:48 PM
Re: We have informed our cloakroom that we lift the hold on Shannon nomination
They are out for the night. No one, in any department, has been confirmed in a couple of weeks. The environment is
toxic right now. Lula Davis sueeests all our noms (about 18 of theml will an on one of the !act davc they are in caccinn
which could be next week.
Will continue pressing tomorrow. Have even
sought help from McConnell's staff and Dave Schiappa from the R floor staff. They are trying to be helpful."
180;"Arlen Specter would like to speak to either of you regarding the possibility of the Syrians helping to free the
three American hikers held by Iran. Thinks they can be helpful."
180;"FYI — Bill did talk to Senator Specter. It went fine. Specter was glad to hear we had approached the Syrians re: the
hikers."
180;Cloture invoked on Bernake nomination 77-23. Final vote on nomination now.
180;Thanks.
180;"FYI -- we ended up not sending the letter this afternoon because Lautenberg's staff was being difficult and hedging.
Now, we can update and send tomorrow (if it is still required) based on latest information from tonight's ruling, as you
had intended from the start."
180;He released his hold. No need for the call.
180;"And after he lifted his hold, the trade preference legislation passed the senate tonight. You probably saw they are
voting on final passage on the health reform bill and debt limit increase on Thursday morning beginning at 8 am. I would
expect and hope for our nominees to move after that."
180;You should call Kyl. I can't get to him.
180;"His cell is:
Verma, Richard R <VermaRR@state.gov>
Thursday, December 24, 2009 9:35 AM
Re: Trying to call you--call me thru ops.
B6"
180;"Verma, Richard R <VermaRR@state.gov>
Thursday, December 24, 2009 9:40 AM
Abedin, Huma
Re: Trying to call you—call me thru ops.
Try: B6"
180;And I have 3 letters in my possession that we are handing to Kyl's office now.
180;Ok
180;Yes. Working it now
180;He is clear and will be confirmed. Thank you and sorry for the fire drill.
180;Sure will.
180;"Murtha back in the hospital
By: David Rogers
February 2,2010 10:43 AM EST
Pennsylvania Rep. John Murtha was back in the hospital Tuesday after undergoing gall bladder
surgery last week.
The Virginia Hospital Center in Arlington said that the 77-year-old Democrat was a patient in its
intensive care unit but referred all questions about his condition to his family.
Murtha's congressional office confirmed that he underwent scheduled laparoscopic surgery to remove
his gallbladder at Bethesda Naval Hospital last week. But the congressman's spokesman refused
comment on the seriousness of his condition or any complication that required hospitalization.
A powerhouse in the House Appropriations Committee and close friend of Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-
Calif.), Murtha was hospitalized for a period in December as well when he suffered an infection in his
gall bladder.
The doctors then decided that it should be removed once the infection had been tempered, and that
set up the surgery last week at Bethesda.
In the interim, Murtha has been back in the Capitol, and in his style, came back from the hospital—
with IV bandages still on him— to oversee passage of his defense appropriations bill."
180;"Thanks for the new years wish. You can give Senator Gillibrand my name, but I will also ask Miguel to call her Leg
Director in the morning. And I will work with Jake to track down Aga Khan's roadmap to stability.
See you tomorrow."
180;"House Members (8): Clyburn (Majority Whip/House delegation leader), Conyers, Rangel, Thompson, Barbara
Lee, Connie Mack, Mary Bono Mack, Donna Christensen.
House Staff (2): Stacee Bako (Speaker Pelosi), Dave Grimaldi (Clyburn)
Senators (7 — add'I House Member likely to get 8th slot): Durbin (Majority Whip/Senate delegation leader),
Bingaman, Bill Nelson, Klobuchar, Lemieux, Barasso and 1 other senator TBD.
Senate Staff (2): TBD
Still a chance the trip doesn't go tomorrow depending on the snow storm. Will make a go/no go decision by
cob today."
180;Sure. I am available.
180;"FYI --
Reid: Shelby Has Hold On All Nominees
Friday, Feb. 5, 2010
Sen. Richard Shelby, R-Ala., has placed a blanket hold on all executive nominations on the Senate calendar in an effort
to win concessions from the Obama administration and Pentagon on a variety of fronts affecting his home state, according
to aides to Senate Majority Leader Reid.
Reid spokeswoman Regan Lachapelle said Shelby is blocking more than 70 pending nominations. Reid can force a vote
on any nomination by filing cloture.
Because of the time required to vote on multiple nominations, the Senate processes most nominations by unanimous
consent. Any one senator can block any of those nominations by objecting to a unanimous consent request to take it up.
The nominations will remain stalled unless Reid files cloture.
While holds are frequent, Senate aides said a blanket hold represents a far more aggressive use of the power than is
normal.
""He should not be holding up 70-plus nominees for a parochial issue,"" a Democratic aide said. ""They're qualified and they
should be moving forward.""
Disclosure of the blanket hold came after two days in which top Democrats voiced mounting frustration with Republican
holds on executive nominees.
'We've got a huge backlog of folks who are unanimously viewed as well qualified -- nobody has a specific objection to
them -- but end up having a hold on them because of some completely unrelated piece of business,"" President Obama
said Wednesday in a televised meeting with Senate Democrats.
On the Senate floor Thursday, Reid, Senate Majority Whip Durbin, Senate Judiciary Chairman Patrick Leahy and
Senate Armed Services Chairman Carl Levin ripped Republicans for holds on national security nominees and judges.
Reid, who kept the Senate in pro forma session over recent holidays to prevent former President George W. Bush from
making recess appointments, said he has grown so frustrated he might advocate such appointments, which the president
can make when the Senate is out of session.
'What alternatives do we have?"" Reid said on the floor Thursday. ""What alternative do we have?""
Earlier in the day, a spokesman for Shelby said the senator has placed holds on ""several pending nominees due to
unaddressed national security concerns,"" including frustrations with the Air Force's handling of the competition for an
aerial refueling tanker. The spokesman did not respond to later requests for comment about the blanket hold.
Northrop Grumman Corp. and EADS, the European consortium behind Airbus, and Boeing Co. are vying for the high-
stakes contract, potentially worth $40 billion. The Northrop/EADS team would build the planes in Mobile, Ala., but has
threatened to pull out of the competition unless the Air Force makes changes to a draft request for proposals.
""Nearly 10 years after the U.S. Air Force announced plans to replace the aging tanker fleet, we still do not have a
transparent and fair acquisition process to move forward,"" the spokesman said. ""The Department of Defense must
recognize that the draft request for proposal needs to be significantly and substantively changed.""
Defense Secretary Gates Wednesday told House lawmakers the Pentagon plans to issue the final request for proposals
soon, and will proceed with the program whether or not there is a competition.
""Obviously we would like to have a competition for it, and we hope that both companies will agree to participate, but we
will move forward,"" Gates said. ""We have to have new tankers.""
In addition to the tanker issue, Shelby's spokesman said he is frustrated that the Obama administration won't build an
Alabama-based FBI center to analyze improvised explosive devices.
Shelby secured a $45 million earmark in the FY08 omnibus appropriations bill for a Terrorist Explosive Device Analytical
Center to be set up at the Army's Redstone Arsenal.
""Sen. Shelby will continue to work with the FBI to give them the capability to coordinate intelligence as well as forensic
and technical exploitation related to IEDs, but this administration's coddling of terrorists makes this an uphill effort,"" the
spokesman said. ""He has made the administration aware of these concerns and is willing to discuss them at any time.""
Also Thursday, Vice President Biden said he was so frustrated by Republican foot-dragging that he was considering
whether Senate rules should be changed.
""There's a little disappointment in that it seems like the only way to do business up here anymore is with a supermajority
on almost everything,"" Biden said moments after swearing in Sen. Scott Brown, R-Mass., who gives Republicans 41
votes, enough to filibuster on any issue.
'What I have been doing is spending a lot of time having my staff go back and scrub this, you know, the use of the
filibuster and how it's worked,"" Biden said. ""This is not a constitutional requirement.""
Biden defended the 60-vote requirement, calling it ""a useful tool. It's legitimate, but from my perspective having served
here, having been elected seven times, I've never seen a time when it's become sort of standard operating procedure. ...
Requiring a supermajority is just not a good way to do business.""
by Dan Friedman and Megan Scully"
180;We will put together a list of members and have the letters ready for you to sign today.
180;"B6
RELEASE IN PART
B6"
180;Armenian Genocide Resolution vote in committee: 23 yes/22 no. Gavel just went down.
180;"FYI —
POLITICO
Boehner chief of staff dies at 46
By: Patrick O'Connor
January 10, 2010 01:40 PM EST
Paula Nowakowski, the longtime chief of staff to House Republican Leader John Boehner,
died unexpectedly Saturday night, according to the leader's office. She was 46.
""It is with profound sadness and shock that I announce the passing of Paula Nowakowski,
my longtime chief of staff, trusted aide and friend, who died suddenly last night,"" Boehner
said in a statement early Sunday afternoon. ""Words cannot adequately express the sorrow
and disbelief I and every member of our team are grappling with today in the wake of this
stunning news.""
A Boehner aide said the cause was an apparent heart attack.
President Barack Obama and Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) were among those who
called Boehner Sunday to offer their condolences on Nowakoski's death.
""The entire Capitol Hill community is shocked and saddened by the sudden passing of
Paula Nowakowski,"" Pelosi said in a statement. ""As Chief of Staff to Republican Leader
John Boehner, Paula earned the respect not only of her Leadership and Conference, but
all House Members on both sides of the aisle. She served Leader Boehner both in his
current position as well as previously at the Committee on Education and the Workforce
with great distinction.
""Paula was a thorough professional who loved the House and worked in a constructive
and bipartisan fashion to implement policies to help the Congress function efficiently. On
behalf of the entire House, I express our deep sadness to Paula's family, friends and our
colleague, Leader John Boehner.""
""Paula had some of the finest qualities a public servant can have: she was committed to
advancing the cause of freedom, she cared deeply about the people she served, and she
was a patriot,"" said Minority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-KY.).
""On behalf of her senate colleagues, I pass on my condolences to her family, Leader
Boehner and his staff, and the whole House family for this tragic loss of our friend.""
It would be hard to overstate Nowakowski's role in Boehner's tight-knit office. She has
worked for the Ohio Republican almost continuously since 1995, when she joined his staff
as communications director for the Republican Conference.
In the years since, she has worked as staff director for the Education and Labor
Committee and served as his chief of staff since he returned to the leadership in early
2006. She briefly left Boehner's side in 1998 after he lost the conference post following a
tough election for Republicans but rejoined him in 2001 when he assumed the
chairmanship of the Education and Labor Committee.
Along the way, she counseled Boehner on just about every decision he made and often
served as an enforcer of sorts for the collegial Republican leader. It would be hard to find
any chief of staff on Capitol Hill who maintained a closer relationship with her boss than
the one she shared with Boehner.
Aides said Sunday that Boehner's office and extended network of former colleagues,
known to many as ""Boehner-land,"" were collectively shocked by the news.
""We will remember Paula as she would want to be remembered — as a tireless worker,
faithful friend, rabid Detroit sports fan, whip-smart strategist, warrior for freedom and
devoted Catholic who counted President Ronald Reagan and Pope John Paul II among
her greatest heroes. She will never be replaced or forgotten,"" Boehner said. ""I ask for your
prayers for Paula's family.""
©2009Capitol News Company, LLC
FD HIDDEN DIV
Tmt Washington ost
NEWS! POLITICS I OPINIONS! BUSINESS I LOCAL I SPORTS I ARTS & LIVING I GOING OUT GUIDE I JOBS I CARS I REAL ESTATE
'SHOPPING
Paula Nowakowski, Rep. Boehner's chief of staff, dies at 46
By Martin Weil
Washington Post Staff Writer
Monday, January 11, 2010; B04
Paula Nowakowski, 46, chief of staff for House Minority Leader John A. Boehner, was found dead Jan. 10 at
her home in Alexandria.
No official cause of death was available. Antonia Ferrier, a spokeswoman for Boehner (R-Ohio), said it
appeared that Ms. Nowakowski died of a heart attack.
A longtime Hill aide, and Boehner's staff chief since 2006, Ms. Nowakowski was named by the Capitol Hill
publication Roll Call to its 2009 list of the ""Fabulous Fifty"" staff members. The accolade recognized her savvy,
her clout and her access to the top people in Congress.
Ms. Nowakowski, an avowed conservative, was highly regarded by leaders of both parties.
She was praised by Boehner and House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.).
""It is with profound sadness and shock that I announce the passing of Paula Nowakowski, my longtime chief of
staff, trusted aide, and friend, who died suddenly,"" Boehner said in a statement.
""Words cannot adequately express the sorrow and disbelief I and every member of our team are grappling with
today in the wake of this stunning news,"" Boehner said.
Pelosi called Ms. Nowakowski a ""thorough professional who loved the House and worked in a constructive and
bipartisan fashion to implement policies to help the Congress function efficiently.""
According to WhoRunsGov. corn, a Washington Post Co. Web site, Ms. Nowakowski grew up in St. Clair
Shores, Mich., and studied English at Cornell University in Ithaca, N.Y.
She told Politico of being made more conservative by the campus ""rise of the loony left,"" citing ""wacky, wacky
stuff,"" which shaped her politics.
According to a reference book on congressional aides, she worked for the Republican National Committee in
the late 1980s and early 1990s, then joined the staff of the House Republican Conference. After two years as a
public affairs vice president of the American Insurance Association, she worked from 2001 to 2006 as staff
director of the House Committee on Education & the Workforce. A Boehner aide said she worked for him at
both the Republican Conference and the Education Committee.
Pelosi's staff chief, John Lawrence, who was Ms. Nowakowski's Democratic counterpart on the education
committee, said they transcended political differences to ""work in a very collegial way to strengthen the House
itself."" He called her ""a great professional.""
After the GOP lost its House majority in 2006 , Ms. Nowakowski said she experienced ""the seven stages of
grief,"" according to the Almanac of the Unelected 2008, a reference on Hill staffers.
""You don't want to be a compliant minority,"" she said of the party's new status, ""but you have to adjust your
expectations.""
In his statement, Boehner called Ms. Nowakowski ""a tireless worker, faithful friend and rabid Detroit sports
fan.
Survivors include her longtime companion, Michael Smith, her mother, a brother and a sister.
C 2010 The Washington Post Company"
180;On the Hill this afternoon went pretty well. Will give you the full run down tomorrow morning.
180;"Did some research on Saving Americas Treasures. Looks like it is funded thru interior approps. Feinstein is Senate chair
and Norm Dicks is house chair. Moran will likely take over for Dicks, as he moves to take over defense subcommittee.
Happy to weigh in with both staffs, but you are also seeing Senator Feinstein this week for dinner. We can prepare a
short paper for her staff."
180;Got it.
180;"65 for and 356 against
(60 Dems and 5 Republicans voting for)
This is an increase of 9 votes since the last votes cast against the war (2009 war supp funding)."
180;Lael was confirmed....79 to 19.
180;
180;More.
180;Sure thing. Will prepare a call sheet for you.
180;We prepared a call sheet that is in clearance now. Will send to you ASAP.
180;"The Secretary's Call Sheet for Majority Leader Harry Reid
Saturday, April 24, 2010
BACKGROUND: Yesterday (Friday, April 23, 2010), Majority Leader Reid sent you a letter in
which he asked you to work with Congress to ""quickly complete action on the Iran sanctions
legislation."" Additionally, he encouraged you ""to support direct [peace] negotiations between the
Israelis and Palestinians.""
Iran Sanctions
Israeli-Palestinian Peace Negotiations
Call Notes:
<<Reid Call Sheet 4-24-10.docx>>"
180;Just sent to you in a separate email.
180;Did you get what you need? Is there anything else that might be helpful to you?
180;"FYI — today the SFRC will take up at its business meeting the State Dept authorization bill. We have been
working with them for months on this package, and they have taken virtually all of our provisions in
tact. There are a few problems (minor) that we will continue to work on those, but all in all it is a good
package. Unfortunately, it will never become enacted, so it is largely a symbolic gesture, but it is helpful
nonetheless. Thought Kerry or Lugar might mention it to you, and our general posture has been to thank
them for their efforts."
180;"Tim Rieser said today our allocation in the Senate for FY11 is $2.6 billion below our request. Haven't seen a
break out of the numbers yet, but that is far better than how the House treated us. We are expecting the
Senate to mark-up State/Foreign ops on July 22nd."
180;"Welcome back to an unbelievable snowy mess in DC!
I wanted to tell you that I met with the Lithuanian official who is heading up the Community of Democracies. Lithuania
has the lead for the next two years. They are extremely energetic and recognize that CD needs to be reinvigorated. It
was not given much leadership from us during the Bush years and besides democracy got a bad name — among other
reasons. Their plan is to create a few working groups focused on issues that are current and important with specific
practical goals and tangible results — among them, one will be focused on women and their critical role. As you know,
they have a female president, the EU has just established a Gender Institute in Vilnius and they remember Vital Voices
when you headed up the conference in Iceland and the successor conference which was held in Lithuania in 2001. We
talked about a more concerted commitment -- to advocating for women and the role they need to play in conflict
resolution (1325), helping women in Afghanistan and working to help women in eastern Europe and the Caucuses where
things appear to be going backwards in many ways (takes me back to our first-ever VV conference in Vienna).
I agreed that we would co-chair the gender working group with Lithuania.
The Lithuanians believe that in many ways the younger generation takes for granted what the older generation fought
for (they remember being a ""Captive Nation and how the US kept them going with an embassy when they was little
likelihood at the time that they'd ever become a democracy), and that today democracies are struggling in too many
places. It's as though we have to take back democracy's good name and focus it as a universal value to address the
critical challenges.
Mike Posner has the lead on CD. I talked to him about all of this. He is all for our doing the gender working group as
something tangible. He is concerned about where the Community of Democracies goes more broadly. Since this was a
creation of the Clinton Administration and since democracy is under siege in so many places, I hope we will find a way to
work with the Lithuanians and others who still want to see it make a difference. In some ways it may be more relevant
today. They are planning the first ministerial in Krakow in July and hoping so much that you will be a part of it.
Assuming I can get there, I'm going to their embassy in the morning where several government reps of participating
countries will be meeting to announce next steps, including the gender working group."
180;"Still haven't heard anything about funeral arrangements for Mr Murtha. I am planning to attend, wherever it will be
(johnstown or arlington). Will let you know when I hear something. It's such a big loss for the community, the state and
the country. PA officials are talking about a special election on May 18th."
180;"The hearings on wednesday are off. The senate foreign relations committee moved its hearing to Thursday am. And
house foreign ops is tentatively scheduled for thursday afternoon. Given the forecast, neither of these may actually
occur.
Starting to hear that murtha funeral will be saturday in johnstown, but that is not confirmed yet. Will let you know."
180;From the Murtha office below....still checking on whether there will be something in D.C. on Friday.
180;More details...
180;I suspect they want him in Johnstown, but I will double check.
180;"Welcome back. I sent to your house a small binder of material in preparation for the Dodd/Berman meeting tomorrow
morning. I am happy to walk you through any part of it or answer any questions tonight or first thing in the morning."
180;"Cc: Rodriguez, Miguel E
Ann Stock was just confirmed by the Senate."
180;"Berman went to the leadership meeting yesterday to make his case for fees - that's what they must be referring to. It
was after that meeting that the blue dogs and hoyer told him no."
180;FYI — on Jackon/Vanik re: Russia. Will send more information as we get it.
180;Think we came to a resolution on government procurement, and civ nuke. Jury is still out on shoulds/shalls.
180;"We sent the paper on consular fees to Tanner today, and his staff confirmed that he has received
it. Assuming Tanner continues to be supportive, we need him to let Hoyer know he supports our effort.
Additionally, Jack thinks it is important for you to talk to Pelosi. Berman mentioned that as well. I can send a
call sheet just in case you have a chance to connect with her.
Thanks again for stopping by the AIPAC meeting. It really helped close out some important issues."
180;"Lowey to Remove Assistance for Afghanistan From Foreign Aid Bill
Chairwoman Announces Oversight Hearings on Corruption in Afghanistan
WASHINGTON — In light of two troubling news reports on corruption within the Afghan government, Congresswoman
Nita Lowey (D-NY), Chairwoman of the Appropriations State and Foreign Operations Subcommittee, today announced
she is removing funding for Afghanistan beyond humanitarian aid from her 2011 bill scheduled for markup this week.
""The alleged shipment of billions in donor funds out of Afghanistan and allegations of Afghan government insiders
impeding corruption investigations are outrageous,"" said Lowey. ""I do not intend to appropriate one more dime for
assistance to Afghanistan until I have confidence that U.S. taxpayer money is not being abused to line the pockets of
corrupt Afghan government officials, drug lords, and terrorists. Furthermore, the government of Afghanistan must
demonstrate that corruption is being aggressively investigated and prosecuted.
""Rampant corruption fosters the conditions that threaten the security of our troops and the stability of the Afghan
government and economy.""
The State and Foreign Operations Appropriations Subcommittee will mark up its Fiscal Year 2011 Appropriations Act on
Wednesday June 30th. The subcommittee will not consider any bilateral assistance for the Afghan government other
than lifesaving humanitarian aid at this time.
Lowey also announced the Subcommittee will hold oversight hearings after the July 4th recess to get to the bottom of
these allegations.
""Too many Americans are suffering in this economy for us to put their hard-earned tax dollars into the hands of
criminals overseas,"" said Lowey. ""We will not commit billions more in taxpayer money for Afghanistan until there are
assurances that such funds will be used for their intended purposes and that the government of Afghanistan is willing
and able to root corruption within its ranks. U.S. taxpayers deserve nothing less."""
180;"Verma, Richard R <VermaRR@state.gov>
Thursday, August 5, 2010 10:14 PM
Mills, Cheryl D; Abedin, Huma; Sullivan, Jacob J; Rodriguez, Miguel E
Ambassadors
We had 31 noms on the Exec Calendar as of tonight. The following 27 made it thru:
Jeffrey (Iraq)
Williams (Niger)
Carter (Cote d'Ivoire)
Feierstein (Yemen)
Reed-Rowe (Palau)
Moon (Bosnia)
Murray (Republic of Congo)
StoreIla (Zambia)
Likins (Peru)
McKinley (Colombia)
Dougherty (Burkina Faso)
Benjaminson (Gabon)
Connelly (Lebanon)
Smith (Greece)
Entwistle (Dem Rep Congo)
Wohlers (Cent Af Rep)
Fergin (E.Timor)
Owen (Sierra Leone)
Jackson (Cameroon)
Wolff (Chile)
Marcie! (Indonesia)
McCulley (Nigeria)
Bridgewater (Jamaica)
Bond (Lesotho)
Jones (Malaysia)
Powers (Powers)
Arreaga (Iceland)
The following 4 remain on the floor:
Ricciardone (Turkey)
Aponte (El Salvador)
Ford (Syria)
Yzaguirre (Dominican Republic)"
180;Good so far...
180;Senate will go into session tomorrow to pass border security bill by uc.
180;They got cloture (60 votes exactly). Will vote on final passage today.
180;Brown, Collins and Snowe voted yes. Feingold voted no.
180;"Wants to talk with you re Afghanistan and his displeasure with Holbrooke. They got into a verbal sparring match at the
hearing. I thought holbrooke was polite and responsive."
180;"And pasted below is the exchange between Corker and Holbrooke:
CORKER:
Mr. Chairman, thank you.
I want to thank the ambassador for coming. I know he has a wealth of knowledge and certainly served our country for
many years.
A number of us wrote a letter to you asking for this hearing, and my guess is you might have had hearings any way.
But the reason we wrote the letter -- bipartisan letter -- was to provide Congress and the American people with a
definition of the end state for our civilian operations in Afghanistan, clear objectives for the civilian mission, and a
detailed plan for achieving those objectives, and the very specific, measurable metrics being used to measure progress
towards achieving those objectives.
I have to say, I've been here for an hour and 10 minutes. I have heard nothing -- nothing -- about that. And while I
respect the ambassador, I've heard a lot of process. I've heard a lot about meetings. I have no earthly idea -- no earthly
idea what our objectives are on the civilian front.
And I don't know if you have time to begin doing that right now, but this has so far been an incredible waste of time,
from the standpoint of -- of hearing, though.
And I have tremendous respect for you, but maybe we have the wrong witness. I hope we'll have maybe Secretary
Clinton and Eikenberry, maybe Crocker. I know he's supposed to come.
But could you answer the question that was the purpose of these hearings in the first place?
HOLBROOKE:
I'm sorry. You don't feel that I've told you what our civilian programs are?
CORKER:
You've told me a lot of process. I'd like to know a definition of what our end state is for civilian operations, the very
question we asked when we set this hearing up, is in Afghanistan, clear objectives for the -- for the -- detailed plan for
achieving those. I'd like to hear you talk about that.
I mean, I'm glad we have a lot of interagency folks here, but I'm not hearing anything that talks about where we're
going.
I'd also like to know how the withdrawal date that's been set affects that and how it affects those we're working with
in the country.
HOLBROOKE:
First of all, Senator Corker, I believe I have discussed our civilian programs in very considerable detail within the
constraints of time, but we did prepare a report for this committee earlier this year, which was entered into the record
and which I will be happy to enter into the record again, if you wish. And you can go through every one of the programs.
The reason I brought my colleagues with me was to show that this was a whole-of-government, an unprecedented
effort.
Now, on the specifics, since you want specifics, Afghanistan is an agricultural country. It exported agricultural products
until 1978 and the Soviet invasion. We are trying to rebuild it. This was not being done for the first seven years of this
war.
We have -- your -- your committee has given us a great deal of money for agriculture. And we are spending it wisely in
a joint AID- USDA effort, which Senator Lugar has particularly been involved in, food, seeds, cash-for-work programs,
encouraging alternatives to opium production.
HOLBROOKE:
Secondly, rule of law. We are spending -- we are spending the money you have authorized for us to create a justice
system which can cut into the Taliban's propaganda about corruption and lack of a justice system.
Third, counter-narcotics. We have ended poppy eradication, a radical change, because all we were doing by
eradicating poppy seeds, poppy crops, was driving farmers, poor farmers, into the hands of the Taliban.
Fourth, a major program of subnational governance, where we are putting aid directly to the district level.
Fifth, a major effort in specific areas, some of which were alluded to earlier, such as electricity for Kandahar. Senator
Kerry asked earlier about Kandahar. One of the major issues here is to bring electricity to the people as a benefit of the
international presence.
The whole range of activities we have is designed to support the country and to support General Petraeus' counter-
insurgency effort. He and I -- I was his counterpart until two weeks ago when he moved to Kabul. We have worked
intimately in an effort to create a joint civilian-military effort. And I am happy to provide you with every detail you wish
in private briefings on behalf of me and my team.
Point number two in regard to the end state issue you raised. I want to be clear on the difference between end state
and exit strategy.
If we -- this is my personal view, senator -- but if we walk away from Afghanistan, again, as we did 21 years ago, the
consequences will be similarly catastrophic, because of the unique strategic position of Afghanistan and the reaction
that would have in Pakistan, China, India and the country to Afghanistan's west, Iran, as well as the larger region that
includes Russia, Saudi Arabia, India, and even extending to Western Europe, which is concerned about terrorism from
that region, just as much as we are.
So, I hope that when we talk about end state, we talk about a sustainable end state which involves continued
American economic and development assistance, and we continue to fulfill our obligations to train the police and the
military. This will not be cheap. But it will be a fraction of the money that is now being authorized and appropriated for
the military campaign.
When we will be able to transition to that is impossible for me or anyone to say. But it won't be on a single day. It will
be a gradual process. And that is what the review in December and the president's decision-making will focus on.
CORKER:
In our foreign policy, generally speaking -- I know we've had some rough times over the last several years -- it's been
something that we've been able to address in a bipartisan way. And I think that the issues that you're dealing with, that
we're dealing with in Afghanistan are incredibly tough.
I still don't -- I haven't understood what the administration was saying in the beginning. That's not to be critical of
them. I just don't understand. I still don't understand. I've met with you and your staff over at the State Department. It's
just incredibly vague to me.
And I think what we are doing, we have partners, which include the Pakistanis and everybody around, that they don't
know what we're doing. They don't know when we're leaving. They think we're leaving shortly, I think. We've just had
colleagues who have come from there.
We've had a -- we've got a president there that's having to play both sides, because he wants to survive, because he
doesn't know what our intentions are. The Pakistanis don't know what our intentions are, I don't think. And they're
making accommodations on both sides.
So, I just have to tell you, I send letters to parents and spouses. And what I feel because of this lack of clarity is that we
are in Afghanistan, because we're in Afghanistan, and that we don't have the will to be successful. And we don't have
the will to leave, because of some of the things you just outlined.
But I just don't hear any clarity. And again, I want to support the administration. I want to support you, because that's
what we need to do as a country, is let the shores (ph) align (ph), let the partisanship.
But I have to tell you, as a person who wants to do that, I still don't understand. OK? And I have average intelligence,
so I would ask you to, please -- or maybe let's have some witnesses in here that can shed more light or be more specific.
But I don't understand, and I'm very concerned.
And I think we're sending a lot of mixed signals. And I think there's a lot of dissension. Actually, as I listen to you, even
within the administration itself, and that has to end.
And I just ask you, please. You have a lot of experience, help us understand. You haven't done that today. And I would
ask the chairman to please have some witnesses come in and explain to us what the end state is, what we can envision
Afghanistan being whenever this withdrawal does take place, because I still do not understand.
We've changed it. Now it's sort of a degraded country where they have conflict, but it's not out of control. I mean, the
bar continues to change. And I'm just concerned as an individual, and yet I want us to be, if we can, all on the same page
as much as possible. But I think to do that, this has got to be much clearer than has been outlined.
HOLBROOKE:
Senator, I'm sorry that my answers don't fully satisfy you. But I want to be very clear on this, because I understand
your comments and I respect them.
First of all, the core question -- the one you are asked by your constituents, and I'm asked by everybody -- why are we
in Afghanistan? The short, simple answer is 9/11, direct threats to our national security interests, and the fact that while
our enemies against our homeland are on the Pakistani side of the border, this is a single struggle. And we have to
strengthen the Afghan government and let -- and teach it to stand on its own feet over time, so that we can move
forward, while we do other things that fall outside the scope of this hearing, to dismantle, deter and defeat Al Qaida.
Now, if you do not believe that it's a threat to the homeland, then we have an honest difference of opinion. But I think
the Times Square bombing incident shows clearly how dangerous that situation is.
Secondly, on the civilian mission, again, it's in support of a single, civilian-military, counter-insurgency mission. And we
have benchmarks, requested and required by the Congress, and submitted to you. And our overarching goal here is
always the same, to disrupt, dismantle and defeat Al Qaida and prevent its ability to threaten the United States.
And we believe, all of us -- and there is no division on this in the executive branch -- that the situation we face out
there is a direct threat. We believe that before the Times Square situation occurred, and I don't think anything could
have proved it more vividly.
And to achieve this, we have to degrade the Taliban as well, because they are part of the enemy's structure -- a
different part, but an integral part -- that we face.
Now, the Afghan government doesn't yet have the capacity to deal with this on its own. How could they after 30 years
of war? And so, the civilian part of it, the things I've just mentioned to you -- police, government capacity, rule of law,
subnational government, training provincial officials, women's empowerment and a whole series of other major issues --
are part of our civilian programs.
And we're happy to come back up to your office -- we appreciated your visit to us -- and continue this dialogue.
Our civilian strategy is designed from keeping Al Qaida at bay, and it's designed to help Afghan institutions establish
conditions for stable governance. Our plan has these benchmarks, which have been briefed to you and your colleagues,
and we're happy to discuss them in detail at any time."
180;"He is calling to complain about Ambassador Holbrooke. He feels that Holbrooke is condescending and not forthcoming,
including at this week's hearing. He also has broader concerns about the lack of a clear end state and metrics for our
Afghan policy, but the main reason he wants to talk to you is about Holbrooke.
Holbrooke tried to faithfully answer his questions and frankly Corker was looking for a sound byte and he got one. We
can offer him additional briefings and a readout after your upcoming trip if that would help.
You could use also this opportunity to thank him for sitting down earlier this week on the New START Treaty; to note
that we received and are following up on his July 14 follow-up letter; and that we want to continue working with him to
get him to a place where he can support the treaty."
180;"The House Appropriations Committee is apparently going to revise it's allocation for State/USAID — it is reportedly some
$1.3 billion better (!). So, the overall cut would be closer to $2.7 billion, not $4 billion. Will report back when that is
finalized. Some good news for a change."
180;
180;"See below....Nelson to support Don't Ask Don't Tell measure. Spoke with Byrd's people too....they think he is leaning to
support it, but would know for sure later today.
Nelson to back 'Don't ask' repeal
By: Jen DiMascio
May 26, 2010 12:08 PM EDT
Nebraska Sen. Ben Nelson (D) will back repeal of don't ask don't tell, likely putting repeal proponents over the top in
their quest to end the ban on gays serving openly in the military.
""I don't believe that most Nebraskans want to continue a policy that not only encourages but requires people to be
deceptive and to lie. The 'Don't Ask, Don't Tell' policy does just that,"" Nelson said. ""It also encourages suspicion and
senior officers to look the other way. In a military which values honesty and integrity, this policy encourages deceit.""
""I will support the Lieberman compromise because it removes politics from the process. It bases implementation of the
repeal on the Pentagon's review and a determination by our military leaders that repeal is consistent with military
readiness and effectiveness, and that the Pentagon has prepared the necessary regulations to make the changes,"" he
said, adding that he spoke with Defense Secretary Robert Gates about the issue.
""He advised that while he preferred waiting until the study is completed, he can live with this compromise,"" Nelson said.
Given statements made by Sens. Evan Bayh (D-Ind.), Bill Nelson (D-Fla.) and Susan Collins (R-Maine) that they, too, will
vote for repeal, Nebraska's Nelson would be the critical 15th vote required for repeal to be included in the defense
authorization bill.
Their decisions were also made after earlier news this week that both the White House and Gates could live with a
compromise amendment sponsored by Sens. Joe Lieberman (I-Conn.), Carl Levin (D-Mich.) and Rep. Patrick Murphy (D-
Pa.).
""We thank Senator Nelson for his support and are extremely grateful. He and other senators supporting repeal will be
on the right side of history,"" said Joe Solmonese, president of the Human Rights Campaign. ""While Senator Nelson's vote
is critical, no vote will be taken for granted in these final hours before the Senate committee vote."""
180;"FYI — the Senate is likely to pass the supp tonight. And, no nominees from any government agency will be
confirmed tonight or tomorrow. Would like to discuss the potential for recess appointments with you and
Cheryl.
The Brookings event, especially your opening remarks, were excellent. Very thoughtful, with lots of real-life
examples. We have gotten lots of positive feedback."
180;"One could serve till the end of 2011. And if recess appointed, the name stays on the exec calendar and chances are the
individual would still be confirmed the old fashioned way. So there would be no need to be reappointed. The fact is
most people who are recess appointed do get confirmed."
180;FYI
180;"Yes Haiti money was in.
Also had a good meeting with corker and isakson. They liked our negotiating record summary, but they don't want to
vote on the treaty in committee next week. Looks like we are headed for september for committee and hopefully floor
action as well."
180;
180;I should have left the blackberry in dc...but yes thanks for the reminder!
180;"Thanks for the read-out. That's relatively hopeful. I am beginning to think the new OMB Director will need to have a
mini-summit on modernization"
180;"One fact that people may not be aware of is that immediately following the election, newly elected Senators
in IL, WV, CO and DE will serve during the lame duck session. In a worst case scenario, that could bring the
Senate Dem total down to 55, which will impact our strategy on START and appropriations, at a minimum."
180;"Thanks for making the START calls. Will follow-up as discussed.
On election news, Murkowski has come back a bit, but is still down a good 2K votes. Many rural precincts
have yet to report, and there are some 7600 absentee ballots yet to be counted. Will likely take another week to
come to closure.
With 429 of 438 precincts reporting
Joe Miller (R) 45,909 51.09%
Lisa Murkowski (R) 43,949 48.91%"
180;Was confirmed by voice vote this evening. Landrieu relented.
180;"Verma, Richard R <VermaRR@state.gov>
Friday, November 5, 2010 6:05 AM
H; Lew, Jacob J; Mills, Cheryl D
FW: The Cable: Granger seeking chairmanship of State and foreign ops subcommittee
The Cable: Granger seeking chairmanship of State and foreign
ops subcommittee
Granger seeking chairmanship of State and foreign ops subcommittee
Posted: 03 NOV 2010 1131 AM PDT
Texas Congresswoman Kay Granger will seek the chairmanship of the State and Foreign Operations
Appropriations Subcommittee, according to her spokesman, ending rumors that she would forgo the post in favor of
some other position.
Although no decisions have been made, until last night Granger was the ranking Republican on the panel and she is
the clear frontrunner for the job. She would succeed current chairwoman Nita Lowey(D-NY), who has served as
chairwoman since 2006.
""Congresswoman Granger is interested in continuing on as chair of the state and foreign operations appropriations
subcommittee,"" Matt LeffingwelL her press secretary, toldThe Cable Wednesday.
When power switches in Congress, a complicated game of musical chairs begins as senior members jockey for
committee and subcommittee chairs. Just being the highest-ranking minority member on a panel doesn't mean one
automatically takes over the chairmanship.
But if Granger does succeed Lowey, she will play a large role in writing the bills that appropriate money for State
Department operations, USAID, foreign operations, foreign assistance, humanitarian assistance, and many other
things. Those accounts all face unprecedented pressure next year as the GOP led Congress will be looking for
spending cuts that don't have strong domestic constituencies.
Last month, we identified Granger as one of 10 Republicans who stand to be influential in the next Congress if
the GOP won control of the House. Since then, we've received several e-mails from sources who had heard that
Granger would forgo the subcommittee chairmanship to pursue leadership of another panel.
We've heard that Ander Crenshaw (R-FL), the third-ranking Republican on the panel, was eyeing the
chairmanship with the expectation that Granger would step aside.
(Mark Kirk (R-IL), the second-ranking Republican on the subcommittee, was elected Tuesday night to become the
junior senator from Illinois, the seat once held by Barack Obama.)
So how would subcommittee chairwoman Granger handle the responsibility of writing the State and foreign ops
appropriations bill? Here's what we reported in October:
Although [Granger] supported the bill put forth this year by current chairwoman Nita Lowey CD-N.Y.),
she criticizedthe increases for the foreign-ops budget, saying, ""We also face the continued concern in
our own country about our economy and the devastating effects of skyrocketing deficits and debt."" She's
a strong supporter of a balanced budget amendment, which doesn't bode well for foreign-aid
funding in this dismal fiscal environment.
Granger also serves on the defense subcommittee, placing her at the intersection of the debate over how
to balance the national security budget and shift resources from defense to diplomacy and development.
Here she seems to favor the Pentagon, saying in June, ""I want to be sure that we aren't increasing foreign
aid at the expense of our troops."" Her lack of support of international organizations was criticized by the
group Citizens for Global Solutions, which gave her an ""F"" in its 2007to 2009 rating. Granger is also
on board with efforts to eliminate aid to countries that are not performing on internal reform, as she
explained when expressing opposition to funding of the Senegalese government through the State
Department's Millennium Challenge Corporation. ""We can't just give out money and say we will put up
with whatever you are doing,"" she said.
The committee leadership assignments won't be doled out for at least two to three weeks, our Hill sources report.
But if Granger's bid is successful, she'll be instantly influential. The fiscal 2011 State and Foreign Ops bill still has
not been completed by Congress, despite that the fiscal year began Oct. 1.
The stop gap funding measure that has been funding these programs since then, known as a ""continuing
resolution,"" expires in December. The lame duck Democratic led Congress is unlikely to be able to pass full
appropriations bills on its way out the door, so they will likely pass another short term continuing resolution. That
would leave the final work on the actual bill to the incoming class led by the GOP next year.
You are subscribed to email updates from The Cable Email delivery powered by Google
To stop receiving these emails, you may unsubscribe now.
Google Inc., 20 West Kinzie, Chicago IL USA 60610"
180;Cloture vote failed. 55 to 41. On to don't ask don't tell.
180;"They got cloture on DADT. 63 to 33.
At the close of the 30 hours (or when they yield back) we are back on START. We were able to convince Reid this
morning not to file cloture on the treaty, which would have played in to Kyl's hands. So we are likely to have one full
more day of debate and some votes on amendments, then file cloture setting up a cloture vote early next week. Mccain
and Graham are still in a grumpy place - Graham is worse than McCain and we may have lost him. But McCain is still
very much in the game."
180;"Yes. Today if u can. And actually I just got a note from McCain's senior person asking you to call McCain now, as he as at
risk of walking too. Will forward that email to you now."
180;I think calling now would be appropriate.
180;"Will vote yes on START....
Thanks for all your help with him.
Now, we need to"
180;"CQ TODAY ONLINE NEWS — CONGRESSIONAL AFFAIRS
Nov. 10, 2010— 6:25 p.m.
House Democrats Plan Schedule
for Lame-Duck Session
By Alan K Ota, CQ Staff
House Democratic leaders on Wednesday outlined a schedule for the
lame-duck session that would have lawmakers in town for at least two
weeks in November and into early December.
Chris Van Hollen, D-Md., assistant to Speaker Nancy Pelosi, said in an
interview after a conference call among Democratic leaders that
lawmakers were likely to work through next week, take a week off for the
Thanksgiving recess, and return for a second — and, for now, final —
week from Nov. 29 to Dec. 3.
Van Hollen, who is poised to take over next year as the top Democrat on
the Budget Committee, said he was unsure how Democrats would resolve
disputes over unfinished business such as tax cuts that are set to expire
Dec. 31 and funding for federal programs beyond the stopgap spending
measure (PL 111-242) that expires Dec. 3.
""We simply identified some of the issues that are out there,"" Van Hollen
said of the private leadership chat. ""Obviously, the big issue is how we
deal with various tax issues. And then there's the issue of an omnibus
[spending bill] versus a continuing resolution. There are a lot of other
potential issues. We're going to try to get the nutrition bill.""
He was referring to ongoing talks over a possible extension of expiring
provisions of the 2001 and 2003 tax cuts (PL 107-16, PL 108-27), the
debate over whether to move an omnibus spending bill for fiscal 2011 or
another temporary spending measure, and a stalled child nutrition bill (HR
5504).
Van Hollen said that Pelosi, D-Calif., did not bring up the issue of the
tough caucus race for minority whip — the second-ranking Democrat in
the next Congress — between Steny H. Hoyer of Maryland and James E.
Clyburn of South Carolina. Both men were on the telephone call, Van
Hollen said, but the issue did not come up.
Democratic aides said Pelosi has encouraged both men to reach a
settlement to avert the potentially bloody intraparty fight. ""That wasn't
part of the discussion,"" Van Hollen said."
180;"Verma, Richard R <VermaRR©state.gov>
Thursday, September 16, 2010 1:14 PM
H
Abedin, Huma; Sullivan, Jacob J; Crowley, Philip J; Burns, William J; Steinberg, James B
Final vote on START
14 to 4
All dems + lugar, corker and isakson voted yes.
Wicker, baraso, risch and inhoffe voted no.
Demint not voting."
180;"Is apparently in a good place. I don't think you need to speak with him.
Reid, with Lugar's support, will file cloture on the treaty tonight setting up a tuesday cloture vote.
Senate will go into closed session monday at 2 to discuss verification. Bond and Kyl will lead the charge. Kerry and
Feinstein are prepared to push back. Clapper will be here in the capitol if needed."
180;"The Senate goes back in at 930 tues am. The Cloture vote on the cr will be at 1015. Alexander will also be recognized
for a 10 minute statement - most believe so he can announce his support for START.
Brown also announced his support for the Treaty this evening. With Alexander, that should put us at the 9 needed
Republicans (Alexander, Bennett, Brown, Collins, Gregg, Isakson, Lugar, Snowe and Voinovich). There are several others
in play (Corker, Chamblis, Cochran, McCain and Murkowski). Moreover, there are bound to be some ""sleepers"" as the
vp called them. This could be Roberts, Crapo, Kirk or others.
We have a meeting in the morning with Kerry, Lugar and Kyl to discuss the remaining amendments. Reid is encouraging
Kerry to offer to vote on a handful of R amendments post cloture, but then move fairly deliberately to a vote on
ratification.
The end is in sight...."
180;"Will let you know about timing on each. Apparently the VP may come up for the cloture vote but that hasn't been
decided yet."
180;Is speaking now. Saying he supports and releasing the letter.
180;"67 -28
Better than we thought. I"
180;"Think it will be in the 12 to 2 timeframe. We are down to about 5 amendments, two of which we may just be able to
accept. Spent some quality time with John McCain tonight, who once again railed about Putin on Larry King. Totally
surreal that's what this has come down to...will email or call when we know more. Just had our last vote for the night."
180;Think we just got him. He cosponsored the Corker missile defense amendment...
180;"Just adopted the last amendment...could vote in the next hour or two. Still waiting for a uc agreement to lock in a time
certain. But I believe it will be between now and 2."
180;We just got a short term extension through the House and Senate.
180;
180;"I am really sorry I can't serve out the full term in H. I love my job, the people of the Department and working for you.
Needless to say, I am grateful beyond words for the opportunity you offered me these last two years."
180;Thank you so much for meeting with my parents today.
180;"For the breakfast tomorrow, we provided two options for your remarks. The first is longer and gives an around the
world + qddr update. Might take 12 to 15 minutes. The second is short (less than 2 pages) and makes a qddr and start
pitch, but leaves the around the world part for q and a. Either approach would work, but wanted to ensure you had
both options in your book so you could decide."
180;"Verma, Richard R <VermaRR@state.gov>
Wednesday, September 29, 2010 8:02 PM
noms
Still unclear if they will go out tonight or tomorrow mid-morning. They have one vote left on the CR.
And, you probably saw Tom Nides was officially nominated today."
180;"Here is the Republican former Secretaries of State op ed, which ran in today's wash post.
The Republican case for ratifying New START
bn)://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2010/12/01/AR2010120104598.html?hpid=topnews
By Henry A. Kissinger, George P. Shultz, James A. Baker III, Lawrence S. Eagleburger and Colin L. Powell
Thursday, December 2, 2010;
Republican presidents have long led the crucial fight to protect the United States against nuclear dangers. That
is why Presidents Richard Nixon, Ronald Reagan and George H.W. Bush negotiated the SALT I, START I and
START II agreements. It is why President George W. Bush negotiated the Moscow Treaty. All four recognized
that reducing the number of nuclear arms in an open, verifiable manner would reduce the risk of nuclear
catastrophe and increase the stability of America's relationship with the Soviet Union and, later, the Russian
Federation. The world is safer today because of the decades-long effort to reduce its supply of nuclear weapons.
As a result, we urge the Senate to ratify the New START treaty signed by President Obama and Russian
President Dmitry Medvedev. It is a modest and appropriate continuation of the START I treaty that expired
almost a year ago. It reduces the number of nuclear weapons that each side deploys while enabling the United
States to maintain a strong nuclear deterrent and preserving the flexibility to deploy those forces as we see fit.
Along with our obligation to protect the homeland, the United States has responsibilities to allies around the
world. The commander of our nuclear forces has testified that the 1,550 warheads allowed under this treaty are
sufficient for all our missions - and seven former nuclear commanders agree. The defense secretary, the
chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the head of the Missile Defense Agency - all originally appointed by a
Republican president - argue that New START is essential for our national defense.
We do not make a recommendation about the exact timing of a Senate ratification vote. That is a matter for the
administration and Senate leaders. The most important thing is to have bipartisan support for the treaty, as
previous nuclear arms treaties did.
Although each of us had initial questions about New START, administration officials have provided reasonable
answers. We believe there are compelling reasons Republicans should support ratification.
First, the agreement emphasizes verification, providing a valuable window into Russia's nuclear arsenal. Since
the original START expired last December, Russia has not been required to provide notifications about changes
in its strategic nuclear arsenal, and the United States has been unable to conduct on-site inspections. Each day,
America's understanding of Russia's arsenal has been degraded, and resources have been diverted from national
security tasks to try to fill the gaps. Our military planners increasingly lack the best possible insight into
Russia's activity with its strategic nuclear arsenal, making it more difficult to carry out their nuclear deterrent
mission.
Second, New START preserves our ability to deploy effective missile defenses. The testimonies of our military
commanders and civilian leaders make clear that the treaty does not limit U.S. missile defense plans. Although
the treaty prohibits the conversion of existing launchers for intercontinental and submarine-based ballistic
missiles, our military leaders say they do not want to do that because it is more expensive and less effective than
building new ones for defense purposes.
Finally, the Obama administration has agreed to provide for modernization of the infrastructure essential to
maintaining our nuclear arsenal. Funding these efforts has become part of the negotiations in the ratification
process. The administration has put forth a 10-year plan to spend $84 billion on the Energy Department's
nuclear weapons complex. Much of the credit for getting the administration to add $14 billion to the originally
proposed $70 billion for modernization goes to Sen. Jon Kyl, the Arizona Republican who has been vigilant in
this effort. Implementing this modernization program in a timely fashion would be important in ensuring that
our nuclear arsenal is maintained appropriately over the next decade and beyond.
Although the United States needs a strong and reliable nuclear force, the chief nuclear danger today comes not
from Russia but from rogue states such as Iran and North Korea and the potential for nuclear material to fall
into the hands of terrorists. Given those pressing dangers, some question why an arms control treaty with Russia
matters. It matters because it is in both parties' interest that there be transparency and stability in their strategic
nuclear relationship. It also matters because Russia's cooperation will be needed if we are to make progress in
rolling back the Iranian and North Korean programs. Russian help will be needed to continue our work to
secure ""loose nukes"" in Russia and elsewhere. And Russian assistance is needed to improve the situation in
Afghanistan, a breeding ground for international terrorism.
Obviously, the United States does not sign arms control agreements just to make friends. Any treaty must be
considered on its merits. But we have here an agreement that is clearly in our national interest, and we should
consider the ramifications of not ratifying it.
Whenever New START is brought up for debate, we encourage all senators to focus on national security. There
are plenty of opportunities to battle on domestic political issues linked to the future of the American economy.
With our country facing the dual threats of unemployment and a growing federal debt bomb, we anticipate
significant conflict between Democrats and Republicans. It is, however, in the national interest to ratify New
START.
The writers were secretaries of state for the past five Republican presidents.
Unsubscribe
The White House • 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW • Washington DC 20500 • 202-456-1111"
180;"OPINION DECEMBER 7, 2010
New Start: Ratify, With Caveats
The treaty helpfully reinstates on-site verification of Russian nuclear forces, but senators should make it clear to
Moscow that they don't see it as limiting U.S. missile defenses.
By CONDOLEEZZA RICE
When U.S. President Bush and Russian President Putin signed the Moscow Treaty in 2002, they addressed the nuclear
threat by reducing offensive weapons,-as their predecessors had. But the Moscow Treaty was different. It came in the
wake of America's 2001 withdrawal from the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty of 1972, and for the first time the United States
and Russia reduced their offensive nuclear weapons with no agreement in place that constrained missile defenses.
Breaking the link between offensive force reductions and limits on defense marked a key moment in the establishment
of a new nuclear agenda no longer focused on the Cold War face-off between the Warsaw Pact and NATO. The real
threat was that the world's most dangerous weapons could end up in the hands of the world's most dangerous
regimes—or of terrorists who would launch attacks more devastating than 9/11. And since those very rogue states also
pursued ballistic missiles, defenses would (alongside offensive weapons) be integral to the security of the United States
and our allies.
It is in this context that we should consider the potential contribution of the New Start treaty to U.S. national security.
The treaty is modest, reducing offensive nuclear weapons to 1,550 on each side—more than enough for deterrence.
While the treaty puts limits on launchers, U.S. military commanders have testified that we will be able to maintain a
triad of bombers, submarine-based delivery vehicles and land-based delivery vehicles. Moreover, the treaty helpfully
reinstates on-site verification of Russian nuclear forces, which lapsed with the expiration of the original Start treaty last
year.
Meaningful verification was a significant achievement of Presidents Reagan and George H.W. Bush, and its
reinstatement is crucial.
Still, there are legitimate concerns about New Start that must and can be addressed in the ratification process and, if the
treaty is ratified, in future monitoring of the Obama administration's commitments.
First, smaller forces make the modernization of our nuclear infrastructure even more urgent. Sen. Jon Kyl of Arizona has
led a valiant effort in this regard. Thanks to his efforts, roughly $84 billion is being allocated to the Department of
Energy's nuclear weapons complex. Ratifying the treaty will help cement these commitments, and Congress should fully
fund the president's program.
Congress should also support the Defense Department in modernizing our launchers as suggested in the recent defense
strategy study coauthored by former Secretary of Defense Bill Perry and former National Security Adviser Stephen
Hadley.
Second, the Senate must make absolutely clear that in ratifying this treaty, the U.S. is not re-establishing the Cold War
link between offensive forces and missile defenses. New Start's preamble is worrying in this regard, as it recognizes the
""interrelationship"" of the two. Administration officials have testified that there is no link, and that the treaty will not
limit U.S. missile defenses. But Congress should ensure that future Defense Department budgets reflect this.
Moscow contends that only current U.S. missile-defense plans are acceptable under the treaty. But the U.S. must remain
fully free to explore and then deploy the best defenses—not just those imagined today. That includes pursuing both
potential qualitative breakthroughs and quantitative increases.
I have personally witnessed Moscow's tendency to interpret every utterance as a binding commitment. The Russians
need to understand that the U.S. will use the full-range of American technology and talent to improve our ability to
intercept and destroy the ballistic missiles of hostile countries.
Russia should be reassured by the fact that its nuclear arsenal is far too sophisticated and large to be degraded by our
missile defenses. In addition, the welcome agreements on missile-defense cooperation reached in Lisbon recently
between NATO and Russia can improve transparency and allow Moscow and Washington to work together in this field.
After all, a North Korean or Iranian missile is not a threat only to the United States, but to international stability broadly.
Ratification of the treaty also should not be sold as a way to buy Moscow's cooperation on other issues. The men in the
Kremlin know that loose nukes in the hands of terrorists—some who operate in Russia's unstable south—are dangerous.
That alone should give our governments a reason to work together beyond New Start and address the threat from
tactical nuclear weapons, which are smaller and more dispersed, and therefore harder to monitor and control. Russia
knows too that a nuclear Iran in the volatile Middle East or the further development of North Korea's arsenal is not in its
interest. Russia lives in those neighborhoods. That helps explain Moscow's toughening stance toward Tehran and its
longstanding concern about Pyongyang.
The issue before the Senate is the place of New Start in America's future security. Nuclear weapons will be with us for a
long time.
After this treaty, our focus must be on stopping dangerous proliferators—not on further reductions in the U.S. and
Russian strategic arsenals, which are really no threat to each other or to international stability.
A modern but smaller nuclear arsenal and increasingly sophisticated defenses are the right bases for U.S. nuclear
security (and that of our allies) going forward. With the right commitments and understandings, ratification of the New
Start treaty can contribute to this goal. If the Senate enters those commitments and understandings into the record of
ratification, New Start deserves bipartisan support, whether in the lame-duck session or next year.
Ms. Rice, a professor of political economy at the Stanford Graduate School of Business and a senior fellow at Stanford's
Hoover Institution, was U.S. national security adviser from 2001 to 2005 and U.S. secretary of state from 2005 to 2009."
180;"Good public movement on START by Judd Gregg.
G.O.P. Support for Arms Treaty
By
PETER BAKER
Another Republican senator signaled Tuesday that he may vote for the new arms control treaty with Russia if it comes
up for a vote before the Senate adjourns for the year later this month.
Senator Judd Gregg of New Hampshire, who did not run for re-election, said he hopes that the Senate will get a chance
to vote on the treaty, known as New Start, right after a deal on tax cuts and a spending resolution to keep the
government operating.
""Start is an important issue. It should be fully debated. I am leaning towards supporting it,"" he told Andrea Mitchell on
MSNBC. ""I haven't made a final decision,"" he added, noting that Senator Jon Kyl of Arizona, the lead Republican
negotiator on the treaty, still has concerns. ""He has some reservations, but I believe many of those reservations are
being addressed,"" Mr. Gregg said.
President Obama has made passing the treaty his top foreign policy priority for the lame-duck session. Under the
Constitution, approving a treaty requires a two-thirds super-majority, or 67 votes, meaning that Mr. Obama needs nine
Republicans assuming all 58 Democrats stick with him.
At this point, more than that many Republicans have offered positive-sounding statements like that made on Tuesday"
180;Senate may move to START tonight....after failed cloture votes....and before fy 11 budget and tax issues.
180;"Snowe Supports Senate Ratification of New
START Treaty
December 10, 2010
WASHINGTON, D.C. — U.S. Senator Olympia). Snowe (R-Maine) released the following statement in support of Senate
ratification of the New START Treaty:
""The New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, known as New START, was signed by the United States and Russia on April
8th and transmitted for the advice and consent of the Senate on May 13th of this year. Since then, the U.S. Senate has
held 18 hearings and as a member of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, I have worked with my colleagues to
scrutinize this agreement and ensure any classified matters are properly vetted. Much has changed since the original
START was first negotiated in 1991, and as a result I have supported efforts to make certain that questions regarding our
ability to verify Russian compliance with the Treaty's limits, to develop and deploy effective missile defenses, and to
modernize our nuclear weapons complex, have been satisfactorily resolved.
""I am confident that New START will provide predictability in our relationship with Russia and thus enhance global
stability, and most importantly, our national security. Therefore, if the Majority moves to consider New START under a
framework that allows for sufficient debate and amendments, I intend to support the Resolution of Advice and Consent."""
180;"One START update: new START remains in the mix for next week, but when it will be fit into the schedule is not firmly
decided. On Monday at 3.00 pm, the Senate will vote on cloture on the tax bill. They expect to obtain cloture. If the
opponents require the use of all 30 hours, post-cloture, they will finish the tax bill on Tuesday evening. It is possible
that new START will then be the next order of business. But that hasn't been decided yet. They could turn to the
omnibus or back to don't ask don't tell as a stand alone measure. but we are still in the mix, and will have to keep
pushing with Reid, Durbin, Schumer etc."
180;"On the first, we have shared with them all of our intel on likely
Republican votes. I think they know we are now well north of 67 votes. On the second, we have confirmed with the
parliamentarian that we can move from the treaty to the appropriations bill by consent or with a simple majority vote.
So if we begin start on tuesday night there is a way to get both measures done by the weekend. We will keep working it
with Reid staff and floor staff over the weekend. If you have any reason to speak with Durbin (he's on sunday shows) or
schumer, I'm sure that would help too."
180;"According to the Reid staff, they will tentatively start the Treaty on Wednesday and stay on it through COB Thursday.
Then File cloture on the CR. It takes consent to stay on START while we wait for the CR cloture petition to ripen, which
would be Saturday w/o consent. So at least two days on the Treaty, at a minimum, and possibly more. But, the good
news, is that it appears that we are starting the Treaty, and will go back to it after the FY11 funding issues are resolved.
We will re-double our efforts to support the SRAP team
and do whatever you need in the coming days on
Af/Pak and beyond."
180;Passed the Senate 81 to 19. START vote on motion to proceed should be at 2:15.
180;
180;"Big change of plans in the Senate. Senator Reid just announced that he was no longer going to move forward with the
omnibus appropriations bill. Instead, he filed cloture motions on the repeal of Don't Ask, Don't Tell and the DREAM
Act.
Those petitions will ripen on Saturday. So it looks like the Senate will be again considering the new START Treaty
tomorrow. We should know the starting time shortly."
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
66;Yes, Ma'am, China ratified in 1996.
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
22;"I spoke to Ann and she sd that you always have the Trustee box to use in each House.
She cannot hold a box for The Secretary of State use only not - bt can further discussions with KC on this
She advises that we need to give advance notice -
There are 4 seat in the Eisenhower that are complimentary and then 4 that would need to be purchased for nominal fee
(seems like a really silly policy) The same for Opera and in the Symphony there are 12 all complimentary. I think if we
begin to use the box on a regular basis we can work with them on the cost issues.
This could be a lovely way to serve many special guests.
Let me know if you want to begin a process of reviewing the KC calendar and start a list of recommendations to invite.
Sent via BlackBerry by AT&T"
22;Why not! Will call him.
22;Sorry which building was that? The hotel?
22;Got it.
22;
22;"Vernon just called to invite you and the President to lunch at his home - january 30th in honor of the Alfalfa Dinner.
Lona - Please let me know when you respond and can you get this request to appropriate person on President Clinton's
staff?
Many thanks.
Sent from my mobile device"
22;"Yes! A great trip.
On Thu, Jul 8, 2010 at 9:02 PM, H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:"
22;"Marshall, Capricia P <MarshalICP@state.gov>
Friday, May 28, 2010 5:03 PM
H
■"
22;
22;"Very sweet email from Harvey. Let me know if you want the movies.
You were amazing yesterday. Will look for direction on details for the upcoming talks."
22;"Back in today to start working on the details for sept 1 - pls let me know of any specifics you want to make sure are
executed.
Enjoy your rest."
22;"RELEASE IN PART
B6
FYI —
Hope you had a nice day and have a great trip."
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
32;
32;
32;"_ .....
From Randolph, Lawrence M
Sent: Wednesday, September 12, 2012 04:33 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: RE: Not a dry eye in NEA
Including mine. Her remarks were really moving. Chriswas an amazing man. Such a huge loss. You know, I was in Libya
before coming here and in my almost ten years, I have never worked with such a calm, cool headed, funny
diplomat. Made it all seem really easy- even in one of the hardest places to work in the world."
32;Remind me to discuss
32;embassy in Yemen
32;
32;"U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739607
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045314"
32;Fyi
32;
32;
32;
32;"From PA Clips [mailtoTaclips@state.govl
Sent; Saturday, October 06, 2012 12:26 AM
To PA-Monitoring-Group-DI; NEA-Press-DL; DS PA Media; Shore, Rhonda H; Atchison, Mark C; Moe, Grace T;
Coordination; Mills, Cheryl D; Tow, Nora F; 10 PG
Subject: Daily Beast: A diplomat under fire.
Person of Interest: United States UN Ambassador Susan Rice
Oct 8, 2012 iloo AM EDT
Leslie H. Gelb
A diplomat under fire.
With the presidential campaign drowning in boredom, commentators were desperately
searching for news, preferably a new victim, to brighten their days. And along came Susan
Rice. A couple Sundays ago, the U.N. ambassador made the mistake of appearing on the talk
shows to insist that the attack on the U.S. consulate in Benghazi, Libya, was ""spontaneous""
rather than a terrorist plot. You would have thought she had said that the pope was a
Mormon.
Out came the Washington daggers. She lied. She was a shill. Benghazi was no spontaneous
event. It was the work of an al Qaeda offshoot. The White House had fumbled key
intelligence information and was now trying to cover up its unforgivable mistake. Rice was
just covering up for the president. Her reward would be Obama's nominating her to succeed
Hillary Clinton as secretary of State.
The commentariat immediately rolled out plans to nail Rice and the Obama team to the
wall. Peter King, the Grand Inquisitor of the Republicans in the House of Representatives,
pledged to ""investigate"" and hold hearings. And that, said the commentariat, would be the
end of Rice's hopes to become the new Hillary.
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739637
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045563
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739637
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
Now, let's take an unfashionable step back and examine the facts, such as they are. Rice did
not make up the ""spontaneous"" story or have it handed to her by White House conspirators.
She got it from the same daily intelligence brief given to the president. Those daily intel
reports told the very story Rice repeated publicly, i.e., that the Benghazi mob formed more
or less on its own, mainly in reaction to the American video cartooning sacred Muslim
figures, and that extremists then took advantage to kill, including Ambassador Christopher
Stevens. Rice didn't make up that story. The problem was not with Rice; it was with the
inevitably complicated U.S. intelligence process.
Her mistake was taking the initial intelligence at face value. The White House biiefers made
the same error, and so did I. I too repeated in an op-ed on The Daily Beast what the
intelligence briefers told me, but I knew very well that more and contradictory information
would appear soon enough. It always does.
Sure, the CIA had additional intel from the start, but it hadn't begun to sift through all the
communications intercepts, satellite photos, and human reports. It always takes time to sort
out facts from fictions and find consistent threads. Seemingly, this gossamer information is
now taking shape.
Meantime, Rice is still very much in the running for the job at Fogg' Bottom, along with
Senator John Kerry, NSC Adviser Tom Donilon, and former diplomat Nicholas Burns, now
of Harvard. She was Obama's earliest loyalist in the foreign-policy crowd, and he still likes
her, despite lackluster reports on her performance at the U.N. The smears, though flatly
inaccurate, won't help her either. What will help her and, more importantly a flagging
Obama after the first debate, is hunting down the Benghazi culprits.
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739637
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045564"
32;"Prom: Nora ToIv (mato
Sent Sun ay April 03, 2011 09:25 PM
To: Mills, ateryl D
Subject: EXCLUSIVE: Bill Clinton Says He Wouldn't Rule Out Arming Uhya's Rebels
EXCLUSIVE: Bill Clinton Says He Wouldn't Rule Out Arming
Libya's Rebels
Pm Just Speaking For Myself, Former President Says
By SUZAN CLARICE
April 3, 2011 —
Former U.S. President Bill Clinton said he thinks the United States should consider arming the rebels in Libya's
civil war.
""It would depend ... and I might need to know a little more, but I would be inclined to do it,"" Clinton told
correspondent Bianna Golodryga today in San Diego during an exclusive interview with ABC News.
Clinton was in San Diego for his annual Clinton Global Initiative University Meeting.
The uprising in Libya stared in February during a wave of social and political unrest in the Middle East.
Fighting has escalated all across the country, but the rebels have found themselves outgunned by Libyan leader
Col. Moamrnar Gadhafi's forces, which are better equipped.
Last month the United Nations authorized a no-fly zone over the North African nation to prevent further attacks
on civilians from Gadhafiss troops in the air.
Clinton on Arming Rebels: 'I Sure Wouldn't Shut the Door to It'
The United States backed the no-fly zone and has also authorized additional support for the anti-Gad hafi
fighters, but key U.S. lawmakers and top officials in the government of President Barack Obanaa have said they
are not comfortable with arming the rebels -- apparently because not enough is known about then
But Clinton said he wouldn't completely rule out the idea of supplying arms to Libya's rebels.
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739646
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045034
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739646
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
""Let me just say this. I sure wouldn't shut the door to it. I think ... we may need to know a little more,"" he said.
Clinton, husband of Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, stressed that he was speaking without ""any official
sanction"" whatsoever.
""I'm just speaking from myself. But I certainly wouldn't take that off the table, too,"" he said.
Watch More of Interview With Bill Clinton Monday on 'Good Morning America'
Gadhafi is the focus of an investigation by the International Criminal Court in the Hague.
Watch ""Good Morning America""i0114)/TOW for the full interview and hear Clinton speak about his
summit, the looming government shutdown and the controversy over President Obama's birth certificate.
Copyright © 2011 ABC News Internet Ventures
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739646
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045035"
32;J .........
32;_
32;
32;
32;"FIRM Fogarty, Daniel .1
Sent: Tuesday, April 26, 2011 8:46 AM
To Mills, Cheryl D; StIlin, Jacob i Abedin, Hume; Web, Ake G
Cc S_SpeeletAardstants
Subject: Stevens Update On Benghazi -- 4/26 7arn
All:
Ops has provided below the latest Stevens update on Benghazi:
• Traffkaccidenti Police have accepted the USG version of the story: that it was an accident and the
victims were not wearing seathelts. The USG employees were returning from the airport when the
incident occurred. A total of four people died and six injured. USG employee Mjuries are light if any.
Our people are standing by pending official USG instructions. Stevens notes there is a UK flight
tomorrow they could be on if necessary. The TNC wants to do a press release to quell the rumor mill.
Stevens will send the draft back to Department for L and PA clearance.
• The British envoy departs tomorrow on permanent change of station. There will be a gap before his
replacement, John Jenkins, arrives from Baghdad.
• INC head Malunoud fibril will be going to Jordan and will not be back in Benghazi until Friday. The
development is likely to he met with additional criticism that he is spending too much time abroad at the
expense of other government affairs.
Thanks,
Dan
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739684
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045055"
32;Here are more details on the overnight traffic accident.
32;
32;--
32;In car driving so can in a bit
32;
32;----
32;
32;
32;
32;Here is Draft
32;
32;
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Thursday, October 18, 2012 8:06 AM
FW:
B7(A)
B7(C)
Remind me to discuss."
32;
32;
32;"Have not seen - will see if we can get
----"
32;
32;militia (McClatchy)
32;"Just starting had to have a little come to with some of our colleagues but folks now on board.
FIR is up there with them"
32;
32;FYi
32;
32;
32;
32;"AP - Rice defends Benghazi remarks
By: Associated Press
November 21, 2012 07:03 PM EST
U.S. Ambassador Susan Rice said Wednesday her early account of the attack that killed the U.S. ambassador to Libya and
three other Americans in Benghazi was based on the initial intelligence community assessments and was always subject
to review and updates.
She said she respected Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.), who has been critical of her, but said ""some of the statements he's
made about me have been unfounded, but I look forward to having the opportunity at the appropriate time to discuss
all of this with him.""
Her comments attributed the attacks to a mob enraged over an anti-Muslim video posted on YouTube were widely
denounced by Republicans during the U.S. presidential campaign. The attack came an the 11th anniversary of the Sept.
11, 2001, terror attacks on the United States, and her critics said it was clearly a terrorist attack timed to take place on
the anniversary.
The focus has fallen on her because she is a longtime White House insider and is believed to be President Barack
Obama's first choice to replace Secrretary of State Hillary Clinton, who is not expected to stay on during his second term.
Rice told reporters outside the U.N. Security Council: ""As a senior U.S. diplomat, I agreed to a White House request to
appear on the Sunday shows to talk about the full range of national security issues of the day, which at that time were
primarily and particularly the protests that were enveloping and threatening many diplomatic facilities, American
diplomatic facilities around the world, and Iran's nuclear program.""
Hours before the Benghazi violence, a mob in Cairo attacked the U.S. Embassy there to denounce the videos as anti-
Islamic blasphemy. Killed in the Benghazi violence were Ambassador Chris Stevens, foreign service officer Sean Smith
and two former Navy SEALs, Glen Doherty and Tyrone Woods.
Rice said, ""The attack on our facilities in Benghazi was obviously a significant piece of this"" pattern.
""When discussing he attack against our facilities in Benghazi, I relied solely and squarely on the information provided to
me by the intelligence community,"" she said.
""I made clear that the information was preliminary, and that our investigations would give us the definitive answers,""
she added.
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739811
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045789"
32;"- Benghazi
Monday November 26 from 2:35 - 3:20 pm - Topic B5
You good with Pat going?
Cdm
From Benjamin, Daniel S
Sent Friday, November 23, 2012 3:40 PM
To Bass, John R; Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Hubbard, Gloria K
Cc: Kennedy, Patrick F; Reines, Philippe I
Subject: Re:
Pat should go.
Front Bass, John R
Sent: Friday, November 23, 2012 03:33 PM
To Mills, Cheryl 0; Benjamin, Daniel S. Sullivan, Jacob J; Hubbard, Gloria K
Cc: Kennedy, Patrick F; Reines, Philippe I
Subject: RE:
Cheryl,
Monday November 26 from 2:35 - 3:20 pm B5
B5
WH has indicated we are limited to either the Secretary +1, or a single seat if she is unable to attend. Would you prefer
Pat to attend, or Dan? Thanks, .IB"
32;
32;"- Benghazi
Great"
32;"From Samuelson, Heather F
Sent Wednesday, January 18, 2012 3:38 PM
To Mills, Ouaryl D; Kennedy, Patrick F
Subject FW: karernentiLibya
Fyi
_"
32;--
32;"- Benghazi
Done"
32;"Brennan, John 0.
Subject: RE: Google and YouTube
Sue just called back and the block will stay through Monday. They will not/not be unblocking it before then.
Nora Toiv
Office of the Secretary
202-647-8633"
32;FYI
32;"Mills, Cheryl 0 <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, September 28, 2012 4:41 PM
FW: DNI Statement"
32;"B6
B5
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739836
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
RELEASE IN
PART B5,B6"
32;"FYI
.........."
32;
32;"The Washington Post
December 4, 2012 Tuesday
Regional Edition
SECTION: EDITORIAL COPY; Pg. A25
HEADLINE: It's not about Rice
BYLINE: Richard Cohen
BODY:
In 1953, an Army officer by the name of Irving Peress was promoted from captain to major. Peress was a
leftist, possibly a communist, and word of his advancement in rank reached Sen. Joseph McCarthy in
Washington. He asserted that the promotion proved the Army was ""soft on communism,"" and he launched an
investigation that transfixed the nation. Peress, by the way, was a mere dentist. He was the Susan Rice of his
day.
Rice, of course, is a much more substantial figure. She is the U.N. ambassador, a friend of Barack Obama's
and a member of his Cabinet. Still, the attack on her is so disproportionate to what she is accused of having
done - just what was it, exactly? - that as in the Peress case, you have to conclude that there is something more
at work.
At first, I thought we were witnessing just another example of Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.) doing his
Rumpelstiltskin number - throwing a fit and stomping his feet. It was McCain who first leveled the solemn
charge that Rice had lied to the Sunday TV shows about the attack on the U.S. consulate in Benghazi, Libya.
She had characterized it as a spontaneous riot when it was, in fact, a planned attack by a local al-Qaeda affiliate.
But Rice was hewing to the early line established by the intelligence community. If the CIA and others were
wrong - or deceptive - then so, inevitably, was she.
Just as surely as day follows night, McCain's broadside was echoed by Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.). It
was soon taken up by 97 Republicans in the House who found Rice unqualified to become secretary of state - a
post to which she has not been nominated. ""Ambassador Rice is widely viewed as having willfully or
incompetently misled the American public,"" they bellowed.
I think Rice would make a dandy secretary of state. She's close to the president, and that matters a great
deal. But she is also seen as overly political and that, as much as her version of Benghazi, is what troubles some
others. Oddly enough, Sen. John Kerry (D-Mass.), a former presidential candidate and another potential
secretary of state, is seen as much more of a statesmen. He is indeed an independent foreign-policy thinker who
has, as in days of old, restored the prestige and importance of the Foreign Relations Committee, of which he is
chairman.
But the awful truth is that it hardly matters who Obama chooses. Foreign policy is run from the White
House and not the State Department. Hillary Clinton is about to retire, and while she has done a commendable
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739841
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045821
B6
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739841
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
job at Foggy Bottom, we cannot expect the inevitable book by her to reveal a Clinton Doctrine. For the most
part, she executed, not initiated, foreign policy.
So what is this fuss all about? Not Rice, that's for sure. It has turned instead into an expression of unease
about Obarna's foreign policy and its politicization. The unfortunate Peress came to personify the government's
alleged indifference to the (equally alleged) communist infiltration of the military and virtually everything else
(with the possible exception of the American Legion), Similarly, Rice has become the personification of
unhappiness with the use of intelligence leaks to buff Obanaa's foreign policy image and the conducting of an
amorphous foreign policy. Like Churchill's famous pudding, it lacks theme.
Syria is an example. U.S. inaction has allowed the crisis to fester. Bashar al-Assad's regime might be
dusting off its formidable arsenal of chemical weapons, further evidence of how chaotic this crisis has become,
but much of the time the White House has just trailed after Turkey or France. The war has spread, a refugee
calamity has developed, 40,000 people have died, and jihadists have come to play a prominent role. The Obarna
administration has been as lethargic on Syria as it initially was with Libya.
This sense of an aimless foreign policy, one lacking any moral fervor (or fiber) irritates conservatives much
more than liberals. It certainly enrages McCain, who cannot stomach the big guys kicking little guys around. He
sees an administration that will not engage the American people on matters of foreign policy - make a case for
intervention, not just say it's too hard to do.
The attack on Rice is unfair and excessive. But the issue is not the person but what she represents - in this
case, the administration's 'mobility to articulate a foreign policy that marries American morality to American
power, not merely American politics.
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739841
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045822"
32;Fysa - calling shortly
32;
32;"So nice
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Thursday, December 20, 2012 7:40 AM
RE: Thank you so much"
32;"FYSA
Prom: Laszczych, Joanne
Sent: Thursday, December 20, 2012 7:57 AM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: FOX from Caitlin
VAN SUSTEREN: Senator, there is a report from the State Department that Secretary of State Hillary
Clinton will testify on Benghazi before the middle of January. There has been some criticism of whether or
not she has a concussion. I believe she has a concussion. What do you think?
MCCAIN: I know that in my view, Secretary Clinton, when she said she assumed full responsibility, she
certainly has a lot of responsibility for what happened in Benghazi. That's -- that report made that very
clear. But I must say, I have never seen Secretary Clinton back down from a fight. And I have
never seen her back down. And / believe that she is now not physically well enough to testify
and she will testify the middle of January.
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739855
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045837"
32;We are awaiting formal confirmation from our team. We are drafting a statement while we wait.
32;
32;"U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739903
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045241"
32;"Cheryl Mills <cheryLmill5
Friday, March 20, 2009 6:02 AM
'Abedin, Huma'; 'Coleman, Claire L'
Talking Points for Call with Sen Feinstein and Greg Craig
HRC talking points on Goodwin - Craig.doc; HRC talking points on Goodwin -
Feinstein.doc
Attached are two sets of talking points I will have Claire print for you today for two call on behalf of
Goodwin's candidacy for the Ninth Circuit.
The first set is for Sen Feinstein, which stresses Goodwin's moderate judgment — she apparently needs
reassurance that Goodwin is not too liberal.
The other set is for Greg Craig, which stresses Goodwin's progressive credentials as he likely will find that
more appealing.
cdm"
32;"FYI - email to me and Jake from Lourdes - the woman we intend to steal I believe ...
Cdm"
32;FYI
32;FYI
32;FYI
32;"HRC:
I asked Anne-Marie to write up a discussion we had regarding
See below - and let me know if any issues; otherwise -- I am going to set this up.
cdm"
32;"fvi
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Wednesday, March 25, 2009 6:39 PM
FW: Obama's Personnel Problem"
32;"Cheryl Mills <cheryl.mill
Thursday, March 26, 2009 7:04 AM
FW:
B6
we still need to decide what to do for them"
32;"FYI
Cheryl Mills
Thursday, March 26, 2009 11:25 AM
Sullivan, Jacob J
FW: Mexico
B6"
32;"cheryl.mills
Thursday, March 26, 2009 12:21 PM
H; Jake Sullivan
Re: Mexico
B6"
32;See below
32;"SANAC areas of responsibility.docx
Huma — can you print for HRC?
Thanks.
cdm"
32;FYI
32;She called me.
32;fyi
32;"FYI below
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Wednesday, April 01, 2009 12:11 PM
FVV.: For your review: Scott Gration Announcement"
32;"FYI
— Reason: 1.4(B), 1.4(D) — Declassify on: 03/30/2034"
32;"International Affairs Budget
FYI"
32;FYI
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Saturday, March 28, 2009 12:17 PM
Fw: A little positive reinforcement to pass on to the S
See below"
32;FYI
32;FYI
32;"See below — another item I want to discuss when you call back (including Mexico and Durban) — have heard not a peep
from Denis on Carlos (and I pinged him) or others.
cdm
_"
32;Calling now
32;Call
32;"Fyi
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Saturday, April 04, 2009 11:18 PM
H
Fw: Thanks"
32;"Fyi below
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sunday, April 05, 2009 6:21 AM
Fw: Durban Language - S/D(S) Language
And my focus arouo of AA at my dinner last nite - none aware of issue or of durban I for that matter and it included a"
32;"Cheryl Mills <
Monday, April 6, 2009 5:06 AM
williamsbarret1 Sullivan, Jacob J'
FW: Key development opinion research summarized
Thought this was useful framing for us as we think of your messaging in general but also the larger framework
document on which AMS is working.
cdm"
32;Your message was delivered to the recipient.
32;"A preview of memo coming to you officially in hard copy today:
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED
NOTE FOR THE SECRETARY
FROM: WHA — Thomas A. Shannon
White House Advisor on the Summit — Jeffrey S. Davidow
S/P — Anne-Marie Slaughter
SUBJECT: Climbing to the Summit of the Americas
42
`i..)
44"
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD©state.gov>
Monday, April 06, 2009 5:40 AM
FW: Gov Richardson
FYI"
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Monday, April 06, 2009 5:43 AM
H
FW: My candidacy
FYI"
32;
32;"Remind me to discuss with you.
cdm"
32;Your message was delivered to the recipient.
32;"Auto forwarded by a Rule
Laura Pena B6
B6
RELEASE IN PART B5,B6"
32;Already did that.
32;"Per my earlier email.
cdm
-^ my- -----"
32;Fyi
32;"Final Dinner List — FYI (excluding DOS invitees)
Invite List: Haiti Policy Dinner
Cheryl Little
Florida Immigrant Advocacy Center (FIAC)
*advocate and expert on Haitian immigration
Tel:
Nicole Lee
Executive Director of Transafrica Forum
*Lawyer, worked for a year in Haiti
Susana Barciela
Former Miami Herald Editorial Page member
now FIAC
*advocate, chronicled Haitian political developments and immigration
Tel:
lyelaw Lloyd Griffith, Ph.D.
Professor of Political Science
Provost and Senior Vice President for Academic Affairs
CUNY College
*expert on Caribbean security
Tel:
Brian Concannon
Director of the Institute for Justice and Democracy in Haiti
*Lead lawyer in Raboteau case
Paul Collier
Professor of Economics
Oxford University
*expert in development economics, author of Haiti special report commissioned by the UN SYG
Fax: +44-(0)1865 281447
Nicholas Kristof
Columnist
New York Times
*has recently been writing on and from Haiti
Eduardo Gamarra
Professor of Political Science
Florida International University
*advisor to govt of Dominican Republic on regional security issues
Tel:
Fax: (305) 348-3593
E-mail B6
Mark Schneider
Senior Vice Presient/LatAm advisor
International Crisis Group
*Haiti among areas of expertise/most recent report ""Haiti 2009: Stability At Risk,"" March 2009
Paul Farmer
Professor of Medical Anthropology, Harvard; Founder, Partners in Health
*got start in pro-poor health care with PIH's first clinic in central Haiti
Tel:
Fax: 617-432-5300
Bob Pastor
Professor of International Affairs, American University
* served as the Senior Advisor to the Carter-Nunn-Powell Mission to restore constitutional government in Haiti in 1994.
Dan Erikson
Senior Associate, Inter-American Dialogue
*frequent contributor to Miami Herald, LA Times, and Washington Post on Caribbean affairs
Leonie Hermantin
Little Haiti Housing and Accion USA
*one of 40 people cited by the Miami Herald for special recognition as up and coming leaders in South Florida.
Marleine Bastien
Fanm Ayisyen Nan Miyami, Inc. (Haitian Women of Miami)
*leading voice of Haitian community in Miami
Johanna Mendelson-Foreman
Center for Strategic and International Studies
*worked on the U.S.-Brazil biofuels project, including in Haiti, and is known to us.
IA
Tel:
Dan Erikson
Inter-American Dialogue
*director of Caribbean Programs at Inter-American Dialogue and manages a project on the politics of development aid
to Haiti.
Bob Perito
U.S. Institute for Peace
*coordinator of the Peacekeeping Lessons Learned Project and the Haiti Working Group at USIP
Robert Fatton
University of Virginia, Political Science Department
*Haitian-Am ofessor of Political Science; has written extensively on Haiti.
Mark Weisbrot
Co-Founder of Center for Economic and Policy Research
*Worked in Haiti in the late 90s
11"
32;"Yes — we can discuss — and in the interim we'll check on the additional names you listed.
We did not ask
Will ask AMS re:
Also asked
yet — he would be on staff list as opposed to outside guest (eg., WH folks will be with DOS foil(s)
but they did not get back yet with any names.
cdm"
32;Your message was delivered to the recipient.
32;Tried you through ops
32;Your message was delivered to the recipient.
32;K - will call in a bit - in line at dmv to surrender my ny license (sadly for me)
32;"April 11, 2009 12pm
Word count: 2,392 (19 min)
Rooney (x7-7203, 202-431-6498)
SECRETARY OF STATE HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON REMARKS TO THE HAITI DONORS CONFERENCE Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, April 14, 2009
For some of us, Haiti is a neighbor. For others, a place of historic and cultural ties. For all of us, a test of collective
commitment and resolve.
Some may ask why a small nation in the middle of the Caribbean Sea should command our attention today. Why
countries in the Western Hemisphere, Europe, the Middle East and Asia should offer assistance to Haiti in the midst of a
global economic downturn that has shaken us all.
We're gathered at this conference because what happens in Haiti will resound far beyond the Caribbean and beyond the
Americas. The success or failure of this one small nation has economic, social and political implications, not just for its 9
million citizens, but for a region whose future will be shaped by the strength of our commitment to achieve economic
recovery, political progress and wider opportunity for people from Portland to Porto Alegre to Port-au-Prince.
The United States is here, first and foremost, because it is the right thing to do for our neighbor and friend. Our ties to
Haiti reach back to the early years of both our nations and have endured for generations-through our struggles for
independence; through the defeat of slavery in Haiti, which inspired slaves and abolitionists in the U.S. to press on with
their fight for freedom; and more recently, through the hundreds of thousands of Haitians who emigrated to the United
States and strengthened it through their contributions in politics, business, science, sports and culture-the benefits of
which I experienced firsthand as a senator representing New York.
We are also here because we are committed to creating a hemisphere in which every nation-no matter their present
level of wealth or current political circumstances-is moving in the same direction, toward greater peace, prosperity,
freedom and opportunity.
With Haiti, we have the chance through global cooperation and collaboration to stand in solidarity with a people who
are seeking to march forward. A nation where small investments and assistance from other countries are beginning to
reap dividends in economic growth, wider access to health care, stronger governmental institutions, greater safety and
security-and the higher quality of life that results when the material conditions of people's lives improve.
Today, Haiti is the poorest nation in the hemisphere, with one of the region's biggest gaps between the haves and have-
nots. But in 2006, Haiti had its highest economic growth since the 1990s. It is on track to reach the completion point for
the IMF's Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative in the next few months, which means significant debt relief is on the
way, which will free up approximately $4 million a month-money that Haiti can invest directly in improving the lives of
its people and building a future of self-sufficiency and confidence.
Haiti has the region's highest rate of HIV/AIDS, the highest rate of maternal mortality, and the highest rate of child
mortality. But the numbers of HIV infections and child and maternal deaths are all coming down.
Not long ago, Haiti endured three decades of a brutal dictatorship. But the national and presidential elections in 2006
jump-started Haiti's democracy, and President Preval and Prime Minister Pierre Louis are seeking to maintain a strong
commitment to democratic governance, which will take another step forward on Sunday with elections for the Senate.
Like many nations, including the United States, Haiti struggles against crime, particularly the global scourge of drug
trafficking. But reforms to improve policing, strengthen the justice system and fight corruption are now underway, and
a peacekeeping force led by Brazil has helped bring stability to many Haitian communities.
Haiti made these strides with help from its own citizens and many of the nations and institutions represented here
today. And this progress did not come only through government-to-government partnerships, but also through links
among businesses, universities, NG0s, religious and cultural groups, and individuals-the full range of resources and
relationships, which is the heart of smart power.
That trajectory of progress has been undermined by the combined winds of hurricanes and a global economic recession.
Haiti is in danger of stalling.
This conference gives us an opportunity to reignite its path to progress and work as a team-with Haiti at the helm-to
advance a comprehensive, long-term strategy for Haiti's growth, by coordinating hemispheric and international efforts,
targeting clear goals, and deploying our diverse skills and resources efficiently and effectively.
President Preval and Prime Minister Pierre Louis have identified what help Haiti needs to get back on track. With these
priorities as our guide and Haiti as our partner, we can make high-impact investments that will help lay the foundation
for stronger democratic institutions, a vibrant civil society, and an open market economy that creates more stability,
attracts international investment, and offers more jobs and wider economic opportunities for Haiti and our region as a
whole.
Now is the time to step up our investment in Haiti-not because the situation is so dire, but because the consequences of
inaction could lead to significantly larger costs in both human and financial terms down the road.
With $100, we can pay for a year of schooling for one Haitian child or immunize five. That's a tiny fraction of the cost of
solving these problems if they escalate over time.
The United States will target our support toward three areas that the Haitian government has requested, which are
aimed at promoting conditions that are essential for national and regional progress.
First, the Haitian people need to be secure. They must be able to travel safely to work and school and participate in the
civic lives of their communities without fear of violence.
Second, the country needs stronger infrastructure, particularly roads, which are the circulatory system of any robust
economy. Meanwhile, the people of Haiti are ready to work, but jobs are in short supply. We can accomplish two things
at once by putting people to work building roads and other infrastructure throughout Haiti.
And third, last year's hurricanes blew a hole in the government's budget.
Now Haiti is facing a huge deficit, which will make it harder to provide services in the short-term or fund major projects
in the long-term. Their debt obligations further constrain their ability to lay the groundwork for the future.
On each of these issues-security, jobs and infrastructure, and debt relief-the United States is lending its assistance and
seeking to partner with other nations to maximize our collective impact.
First, security. Effective international partnerships have already helped stem violence and improve security in Haiti. Cite
Soleil, for example, was a no-man's-land for years, but today, violence has subsided and a new sense of freedom is felt in
the streets.
The Haitian National Police have been supported in their work by the UN peacekeeping operation in Haiti, which is the
first in the hemisphere in which Latin American and Caribbean nations have participated. Brazil has led the mission with
determination and skill. This level of engagement and collaboration is a major step forward for our region.
But criminal networks operating in Haiti have not been eliminated. Haiti continues to fight drug traffickers who have
made this country a distribution point for illegal drugs headed to the United States, Canada and Europe.
Drug trafficking is a problem that involves many nations, all of which have a role to play in ending this deadly trade. That
includes the United States. We will give $2 million to fight drug trafficking in Haiti through the Merida Initiative, a plan
conceived by Mexico, Central America and the United States. This money will fund a secure communications network
for the Haitian police; provide a maritime base, vehicles and operational support for police drug units; provide training
to promote cross-border cooperation between Haiti and the Dominican Republic; and sharpen the investigation and
prosecution of drug crimes.
Once security is established, opportunity can take root. Nations from Canada to Spain to Japan offered generous
assistance to help repair the damage from last year's storms. Now it is time to take the next step-to move beyond
peacekeeping and disaster relief to long-term reconstruction and development.
Haiti has the highest unemployment rate in the hemisphere; 70 percent of its people don't have jobs. It also has one of
the region's highest population growth rates. Together, these trends have created what one development expert has
called a ""youth tsunami""-nearly 1 million youths are expected to come into the job market in the next five years.
To spur the creation of jobs, the United States passed the HOPE Act in 2006, to give garments made in Haiti tariff-free
access to the U.S. market. Last October, we extended this trade preference for another decade. Apparel is one of the
largest sectors in Haiti's economy. We see great potential for job creation in this field, and we are gratified by Brazil's
interest in supporting the Haitian apparel industry as well.
But to build a diversified economy, Haiti needs more than trade deals. It also needs the infrastructure to support the
flow of goods and services. The roads in Haiti are beyond inadequate; many communities are isolated by the lack of a
passable road, which prevents people from holding jobs, children from going to school, and farmers from bringing their
crops to market.
Better roads could facilitate greater trade and bring more Haitians into the global economy.
Haiti also needs better roads in tourist areas, to promote that sector of the economy. Other urgent infrastructure needs
include digging water catchments to prevent floods, completing a garment workers' training center, and creating canals
to help irrigation.
As part of the $287 million in non-emergency assistance we will provide to Haiti this year, we have authorized $20
million in aid to generate jobs, to help people put their skills to work building their country's future. We look forward to
working with Haiti to distribute that money quickly and effectively, to trigger a virtuous circle for long-term economic
growth.
All the fiscal responsibility in the world can't prevent a natural disaster.
The hurricanes didn't just wash away crops and houses; they also washed away
months of government planning for the future. Haiti is facing an
approximately $50 million budget deficit, which could undermine Haiti's long-term ambitions as well as services that
people depend on to survive.
The United States will provide $20 million to pay Haiti's upcoming debt service obligations, to free Haiti to use its
resources to fill that budget gap.
[There is a fourth urgent need that the United States is committed to helping Haiti resolve. The combined effect of
rising food prices globally and the destruction of crops by the hurricanes have exposed millions of Haitians to
malnutrition and its destructive effects on health and productivity. Malnourished people are often too weak to work;
chronically hungry children struggle to learn in school. Food insecurity is not only a source of suffering, but a direct
threat to economic growth and global stability. The United States will provide a $15-million in-kind contribution of food
to help Haiti as it continues to rebuild. ]
These are some of the ways in which the United States is ready to partner with Haiti and other nations. But there are
additional pieces of the larger mission that need support-from helping Haiti adapt to climate change so future
hurricanes won't claim thousands of lives; to strengthening health systems; promoting sustainable agriculture; and
developing civil society.
This work is not only a matter for governments, but also a mission for our people. Here in the U.S., I have heard from
many individuals and groups who care about Haiti and want to help it develop but don't know how to invest their time
and money in a way that will make a real impact. We should think creatively about helping people outside government
get involved in a meaningful way with Haiti's future. Our people are our most valuable resource, and their potential to
help in places like Haiti has not yet been tapped.
We know from empirical data that small investments go a long way. This is something I've seen for myself in my own
visits to Haiti. I traveled there with my husband shortly after our wedding, and again years later as First Lady. I met a
doctor who had emigrated to the United States and became a U.S. Air Force Colonel, but returned to his home town of
Pignon to run a center for health, women's literacy and microcredit. He and his staff had few resources, but they
offered a comprehensive range of services to thousands of clients.
I visited a family-planning clinic where young people were trained to educate their peers about how to protect their
health and prevent teen pregnancy.
And I met with women from a group called Women in Democracy. These women had attended a global conference on
women's leadership in Montevideo, Uruguay, and when they returned home, they created this organization to support
Haitian women running for office.
Eleven years later, their organization is larger and stronger than ever, and so is their mission. In addition to supporting
women candidates, they also hold trade fairs for women entrepreneurs, run civic education programs to teach women
their rights, support women journalists, and build connections between women throughout the Caribbean.
These Haitian women remind us that we will never achieve real progress if we leave millions of people behind. And they
demonstrate a powerful commitment on the part of the Haitian people to participate in and lead their nation's recovery.
Our role is to support their work however we can, and to demonstrate through our actions our belief that their future is
as important as our own.
What happens next in Haiti will send a message to the world about the power of collaboration on behalf of every poor
nation that has worked hard to earn a foothold in the global economy but has tumbled in recent months.
On behalf of every man and woman in the hemisphere, from the northern expanses of Canada to the southern tip of
Argentina, who is working harder than ever with fewer resources and for smaller rewards. and the children whose
futures have been jeopardized by forces far beyond their control. let us prove our commitment to an economic recovery
that reaches not only the citizens of our individual nations but all people everywhere."
32;Your message was delivered to the recipient.
32;"cheryl.mills
Saturday, April 11, 2009 6:24 PM
Delivered: Re: Haiti Draft -- Attached and Below in Text
details.txt
Your message was delivered to the recipient."
32;"Saturday, April 11, 2009 6:59 PM
Delivered: Any news?
details.txt
Your message was delivered to the recipient."
32;Your message was delivered to the recipient.
32;"Happy easter to you! We just finished one hunt at the domenici clan and headed to my mother's so will try you after
830pm.
Cdm"
32;"My revisions in text in caps (or brackets for deletions) — sending to them once we speak shortly.
Cd m
STATEMENT BY ROBERT WOOD, ACTING SPOKESMAN
Durban Review Conference: U.S. Position
[end]"
32;43
32;Your message was delivered to the recipient.
32;Print for HRC
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Monday, April 13, 2009 8:42 AM
H
Brasilia
Tom was honored and overwhelmed and accepted.
He said you have made him very happy and he will not let you down.
He speaks Portuguese and served there so it also has personal meaning to him.
He indicated Lula would likely be very pleased by the pick as they enjoy a good relationship and have for years.
cdm
45"
32;"FYI
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Monday, April 13, 2009 12:04 PM
H
FW: decision update"
32;"FYI — you want me to have a letter done back saying thank you for sending — you appreciate his thoughts?
See below"
32;FYI — How comfortable are you with us thinking about doing something more with this
32;FYI
32;FFYI
32;FYI
32;See below — we're meeting at 10:30am
32;Fyi
32;Enjoy — see message below Pfs
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, May 01, 2009 5:31 PM
H
FW:
RELEASE IN
PART B6
FYI"
32;"RELEASE IN PART
B5
Fyi - I plan to send to denis"
32;Fyi
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Saturday, May 02, 2009 3:24 PM
H
RE:"
32;FYI
32;FYI
32;FYI
32;"RELEASE IN
PART B6
I spoke with laura yesterday re folks you mentioned - her is person she ans Jose thought best"
32;FYI
32;k
32;Do you want to see her this week?
32;
32;"We will know by this sat - it went well.
We should discuss."
32;"I think you still should do but see below. I am going to reach out to listen to him.
Thoughts?
cdm
B6"
32;"RELEASE IN PART
B6
fyi"
32;See below.
32;
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Thursday, April 16, 2009 8:01 AM
H
Traffic below from elleny B6
fyi"
32;Yep
32;"Nothing new to report- count yours -- our flights were delayed on runways so I got home at midnightl
xo
cdm"
32;FYI
32;really liked
32;FYI
32;Am in office
32;fyi
32;"Cheryl Mills <
Wednesday, April 22, 2009 6:14 AM
H
RE: (no subject)
Oh My — see below.
cdm"
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, April 24, 2009 12:29 PM
H
FW: FYI: I
FYI"
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, April 24, 2009 12:40 PM
FW: Re
FYI"
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, April 24, 2009 1:50 PM
Abedin, Huma
FW: North Korea Human Rights Envoy
if they now do believe a full-time slot is there? B6
B5
cdm"
32;"I will -- EAP and Bosworth apparently are fine per below
So likely more judgment call."
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, April 24, 2009 4:36 PM
H
Updates
Yes
Wants to talk with family, and with us re: role and in particular re: in the portfolio given
Holding so can interview on Monday and then will offer it to him so he knows he is part of her team;
Message on several cell phones — he is apparently traveling.
No word on et.
cdm
38"
32;FYI
32;Fyi
32;"K - nothing to report except on cos retreat - interesting cony, discussion of reform agenda which I want to download to
jack, polling and appearance by bho.
Think I want to have messina come over to give ypu polling pres on what connects bho to people and his success and
why they care about certain things."
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sunday, April 26, 2009 10:29 AM
H
Fw: Bob King
Fyi"
32;Calling you now
32;FYI
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sunday, April 26, 2009 9:54 PM
H
FW: Geneva
Resume.rtf
RELEASE IN PART
B5,B6
B6
B5
B6
B6
This is who Esther wants
1"
32;See first two
32;"cheryl.mills
Wednesday, May 20, 2009 9:09 AM
H
Cheryl Mills; Cheryl Mills
Re: greetings to you!
K - we had a good cony
The issue is how long is"
32;"You need to walk this to HRC if she is not gone
I also am going to give WH heads up.
cdm"
32;"cheryl.mills
Wednesday, May 20, 2009 9:23 AM
H
Re: greetings to you!
Yes"
32;"FYI
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, May 08, 2009 3:55 PM
H
FW: Bob Einhorn"
32;"shot him email that we need to talk -- but the Amb wanted to give me readout from his meeting with GTIP before raising
it further."
32;FYI
32;"email I recieved below)
Fyi"
32;"Will call you shortly - my tamn gets in in 15 min.
Remind me to discuss brief filing and speech again -- everyone is going (Gates, Panetta, Napolitano, Holder) except for
Blair. We don't have logically response to why you are not there when asked and team is showing up. Easy box to check
since we don't yet anticipate going to egypt.
Cdm"
32;Will print for you in am too
32;"Whoo hoo!
Sent via BlackBerry by AT&T"
32;"email I recieved below)
Fyi"
32;Read this - it says todd stern sent chills up someone's spin (in a good way)!
32;I 96
32;"Fyi
Sent via BlackBerry by AT&T"
32;Fyi
32;Fyi
32;Fyi
32;
32;I did
32;fyi
32;fyi
32;FYI
32;
32;"AMS did not like any of this both for the substance and because she did not write it so we did not share it with you
today. Then I decided to share it with you anyway for any value it has for you.
Frame:
The world we live in today is inextricably interconnected. Together we succeed. Apart we fail. In the Obama
Administration, we will use smart power to advance to our shared security, shared prosperity and shared humanity.
In advancing our shared security, we seek to:
• Reduce threat of violent extremism
• Reduce the spread of weapons of mass destruction
In advancing our shared prosperity, we seek to:
• Use development to create and sustain strong stable economies by:
o Focusing on women as essential for driving economic growth;
o Expanding access to food and the means to grow or buy it; and,
o Expanding access to quality education in developing countries;
• Expand access to stable, affordable and increasingly clean energy sources
In advancing our shared humanity, we seek to:
• Expand human rights and the conditions that promote respect for human rights
• Support the development of health systems that support healthier societies and
confront the spread of pandemic disease (e.g., AlDs)
How we achieve these goals:
We will advance these goals through shared responsibility and the application of smart power. America has the
responsibility to lead, but can only lead in partnership with others. Smart power means elevating and
integrating diplomacy and development.
DIPLOMACY:
Focus on priority partnerships:
• Revitalized partnerships with historic allies EU, Japan, Korea, Australia;
• Calibrated partnerships with China and Russia;
31
• Cultivated partnerships: Brazil, India, Turkey, Indonesia, and South Africa;
• Targeted public/private and multilateral partnerships based upon the principles of
variable geometry (Le., focused on the problem at hand).
Build strong partnerships by:
• listening and mutual respect — which has begun already and will continue
• being accountable for the challenges we create and demanding that our partners are
similarly accountable;
• focusing on government to people, and people to people connections using new
technology to create buy in from bottom up so shared responsibility is experienced
on the ground and sustainable;
• eliminating the obstacles to cooperation that stand in the way of us achieve our
goals (e.g., resolving Cyprus so Turkey can enter the EU; engaging Iran to create
greater accountability among EU partners if engagement fails)
• creating work plans to drive cooperation on our shared agenda: tasks, timetables
and benchmarks for each country
DEVELOPMENT:
Establish and implement against our critical priorities:
• Women as economic drivers and social stabilizers;
• Education as the gateway to economic opportunity and human rights;
• Food and agriculture as the cornerstone of sustainable local economies
• Global health as the foundation for the future
Reform our government institutions
• Improve coordination in planning and budgeting across our diplomacy and
development
• Make Ambassadors country-level CEOs responsible for government-wide
efforts in each country.
o Grow the quality, talents and capacities of our development institutions;
o Introduce effective metrics and evaluation for accountability
Improve delivery and outcomes
32
• Assess and promote what works and stop spending resources on what doesn't.
• Establish transparent benchmarks for measuring success
33"
32;FYI
32;Author of Renegade is Richard Wolfe (wrote for Newsweek)
32;"FYI
•"
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Monday, March 30, 2009 3:53 PM
FW: DPRK/CHINA: AMCIT BORDER DETENTIONS UPDATE #11
FYI
— Reason: 1.4(B), 1.4(D) — Declassify on: 03/29/2034"
32;Fyi
32;"See below.
cdm"
32;"You can't likely read the attachment but it is a long letter to Jim saying he's sorry he has missed Jim's calls (nothing about
mine) and that he is taking job with energy.
Copying huma to print for you.
Cdm"
32;"Fyi
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Saturday, May 09, 2009 7:17 AM
Fw: Tom in Jamaica"
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Saturday, May 09, 2009 10:38 AM
Re: Tom in Jamaica
Today - we then need to decide
Cdm"
32;
32;I'll have Margaret meet
32;"Oh my.
cdm
Forwarded message
,"
32;FYI
32;FYI
32;"Fyi
Worked out relations with david and dick and todd.
See WI re working out of space.
David has turned in all paprwork too so shoyld be on board relatively soon.
Cdm"
32;Fyi
32;Fyi
32;2
32;fyi
32;FYI
32;Fyi in case you wanted to see raw input
32;FYI
32;FYI
32;FYI
32;"FYI
CQ TODAY ONLINE NEWS — APPROPRIATIONS
June 4, 2009 — 1:39 p.m.
War Supplemental Conference Slips to Next Week
By Josh Rogin, CQ Staff
House leadership has decided not to hold a conference or a vote on the war supplemental spending bill this
week, as leaders worked behind the scenes to secure enough Democratic votes to pass the measure absent GOP
support.
Multiple lawmakers and aides confirmed the expected Thursday session to finalize negotiations over the bill
(HR 2346), which is mainly to fund the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, will not occur until at least early next
week. Democratic leaders were trying to convince as many as 18 of the 51 Democrats who voted against the
House version in May to change their votes, but many said they would not do so.
Republicans are promising to vote against the conference report en mass if it includes $5 billion worth of
funding related to the International Monetary Fund. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., said Thursday it
would.
""I believe there are people in the Republican Party who support [the IMF funding]; they just don't want to
support it on this bill,"" Pelosi said Thursday, ""So we have to do that with all Democratic votes.""
She also pushed back against two key pillars of the House Republican leadership's argument against the IMF
funding, which is meant to accommodate an increased U.S. credit extension to the organization.
Responding to statements of Minority Leader John A. Boehner of Ohio that the IMF money is unrelated to the
war spending measure, Pelosi said the IMF help was a ""national security initiative"" because it helps to alleviate
sources of instability, such as poverty.
Pelosi also accused House Minority Whip Eric Cantor, R-Va., of fear mongering by putting out a statement
warning that IMF assistance could somehow fund terrorism.
""I don't know why anyone would say that the money is going to the hands of terrorists,"" she said. ""It simply is
not based in fact and is a scare tactic, and most unfortunate.""
House Democratic aides said the conference on the supplemental bill probably would be early next week.
""We're going to come up with a supplemental conference report in the next few days,"" said Senate Majority
leader Harry Reid, D-Nev.
6
Whipping Votes
House leaders had planned to hold the conference session Thursday and had said the House floor vote could be
as early as Friday. But their effort to convince members to switch their no votes was still underway Thursday
afternoon. •
Although several high ranking Democrats have pledged to switch their no votes, including Reps. Barney Frank,
D-Mass., and George Miller, D-Calif., many others have said they would not.
""It's a conscience vote,"" said Rep. Alan Grayson, D-Fla., who said he was inclined to not change his stance on
the bill
""I haven't cracked yet,"" said Rep. Jim McGovern, D-Mass., who along with other anti-war Democrats has
pledged to be against any war funding that does not provide for the withdrawal of troops from southwest Asia.
Still, many Democrats said that the leadership was lobbying them relatively intensely.
More Details Emerge
Meanwhile, more details of the near finalized supplemental conference report negotiations came out Thursday.
Senate Appropriations Committee Chairman Daniel K. Inouye, D-Hawaii, said that the final bill will ""in all
likelihood"" include money for 5 C-130 transport planes and 8 C-17 cargo planes, none of which was requested
by the administration or in the Senate's bill. The House bill had sought 11 C-130s and the 8 C-17s.
Overall, the defense portion of the bill is expected to be about $4 billion less than the House version but still
billions above the Senate version and the administration request, House Appropriations Defense subcommittee
chairman John P. Murtha, D-Pa., said.
As for the fate of prisoners at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, the conference report likely will include language
barring the administration from transferring prisoners to U.S. soil for the remainder of the fiscal year, said
House Appropriator James P. Moran, D-Va.
No money towards the president's effort to close the prisons will be in the conference report, Moran added. The
president had requested $80 million but neither the House nor Senate versions included those funds.
John M Donnelly and Katherine Hunter contributed to this story
Source: CQ Today Online News
Round-the-clock coverage of news from Capitol Hill.
© 2009 Congressional Quarterly Inc. All Rights Reserved.
7"
32;"fyi
c"
32;"Below is current draft of the press release we would issue once DOJ issues their release:
REVISED DRAFT
06/05/09-0715
14"
32;FYI
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD©state.gov>
Friday, June 05, 2009 4:52 PM
H; Doug Band
Justin Cooper
FW: Many Haitians See Bill Clinton Appointment as Setting Up Protectorate
For HRC/WJC"
32;
32;"Importance: High
See below"
32;Fyi
32;Fyi
32;"Huma, jake and I have been discussin nd whether to recommend a change. B6
He has the option if we do this year to B6
B5
B6
B5
Do you have strong feelings? We can discuss but I wanted to email when I was thinking of it so we remembered to
discuss.
Cdm
Sent via BlackBerry by AT&T"
32;
32;"Rooney)
June 6,2009 11:30am
Rooney (x7-7203,
CONCEPT NOTE FOR WORLD FOOD PRIZE CEREMONY
Thursday, June 11, 2009
This speech is an opportunity to signal the urgency of the problem of global hunger; connect it to an array of
global issues, including economic development, health and education, expanding opportunity for women, and
political stability; and declare the Administration's commitment to tackling hunger at its roots, through effective
and efficient collaboration with an array of partners.
Additionally, your remarks can point to a shift from past approaches by emphasizing the need to support local
solutions and focus on long-term sustainability to help people feed themselves and reduce the need for
emergency assistance down the road.
The speech could be framed as follows:
THE PRIZE AND PRIZE-WINNER
You can begin by announcing the winner of the 2009 World Food Prize, Dr. Gebisa Ejeta. He has a remarkable
story: born in a mud hut in Ethiopia, he got his PhD from Purdue University in plant breeding and genetics and
developed strains of sorghum that are drought-tolerant, high-yield, and resistant to the Striga weed, which
devastates crops across Africa.
Outside the lab, he helped start the Sudanese commercial seed industry; developed systems to produce, certify,
and market hybrid seeds; and educated farmers about the use of fertilizers and soil and water conservation. And
he has trained and inspired the next generation of African agricultural scientists.
A COMPREHENSIVE APPROACH: FROM LAB TO FARM TO MARKET TO TABLE
Dr. Ejeta's work reflects the breadth of this issue and the comprehensive approach needed to address it—one
that connects the labs where new seed technologies are developed.., the fields where small-scale farmers labor
to feed their families and make a living.., the markets where food is bought and sold... and the homes where
people get the nourishment they need to thrive.
In many places, that food chain is broken. One billion people worldwide woke up hungry this morning and will
go to sleep hungry tonight. Chronic hunger threatens health, while making it harder for people to work and
students to learn, which in turn stunts economic development. Last year's food riots demonstrated that when
food is scarce, political stability is threatened.
44
To date, the world's primary response to hunger has been to send emergency food aid. While this saves lives, it
is a short-term fix, and we need a long-term solution.
The Obama Administration is committed to leading in developing a new global approach. We will support the
creation of sustainable agricultural systems in appropriate regions around the world, to increase agricultural
productivity, create jobs, strengthen economies, and protect natural resources.
We will do this not by imposing one-size-fits-all solutions, but by assisting countries in carrying out individual
strategies that meet their needs—for example, through the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development
Plan. To facilitate coordination and share best practices, we will seek to convene donor governments,
multilateral institutions, NG0s, private companies, foundations, universities, and individuals.
THE ANCHORS OF OUR APPROACH
We've identified seven anchors that secure sustainable agriculture systems. These will guide our approach.
• Increase agricultural productivity by expanding access to quality seeds, fertilizer, irrigation, the credit to
purchase them, and the training to use them.
• Stimulate the post-harvest sector by improving the storage and processing of food and improving
transportation to connect small farmers to markets.
• Maintain natural resources so the land can be farmed well into the future and we can make the right
adaptations for the changing environment.
• Expand knowledge and training by support R&D and developing the next generation of agriculture
scientists.
• Increase trade so small-scale farmers in developing countries can sell their crops far and wide.
• Support policy reform and good governance, because sustainable agriculture flourishes in a clear and
predictable policy and regulatory environment.
• Support women and families in agriculture. Seventy percent of the world's farmers are women, but
most of the programs that offer credit and training to farmers target men. This must change for
agriculture to thrive. And children must have nutrition to contribute to their communities' future.
A PREVIEW OF WHAT'S TO COME
In the coming weeks, President Obama, Secretary Vilsack and I will be reaching out to share our approach to
global coordination and agriculture in greater detail. We will seek the input, wisdom and guidance of those who
have been working so long in this arena—from the Congress to NGOs to academics to foundations to the
private sector. The President's conversations at the G-8 meeting in Italy in two weeks will address our
approach, as well as my trip to Africa in August.
Addressing hunger and food is essential to achieving economic recovery, stabilizing societies, and expanding
opportunity for hundreds of millions of people worldwide. This is why supporting sustainable agriculture
worldwide will be a central element of foreign policy in the Obama Administration.
CONCLUSION
You can circle back to the story of Dr. Ejeta to close. He represents the need for a multinational
approach: born in Ethiopia, educated in the United States, advised by Indian scientists, advisor to several
African nations.
45
June 6,2009 11:30
Rooney (x7-7203,
CONCEPT NOTE FOR WORLD FOOD PRIZE CEREMONY
Thursday, June 11, 2009
This speech is an opportunity to signal the urgency of the problem of global hunger; connect it to
an array of global issues, including economic development, health and education, expanding
opportunity for women, and political stability; and declare the Administration's commitment to
tackling hunger at its roots, through effective and efficient collaboration with an array of
partners.
Additionally, your remarks can point to a shift from past approaches by emphasizing the need to
support local solutions and focus on long-term sustainability to help people feed themselves and
reduce the need for emergency assistance down the road.
The speech could be framed as follows:
THE PRIZE AND PRIZE-WINNER
You can begin by announcing the winner of the 2009 World Food Prize, Dr. Gebisa Ejeta. He
has a remarkable story: born in a mud hut in Ethiopia, he got his PhD from Purdue University in
plant breeding and genetics and developed strains of sorghum that are drought-tolerant, high-
yield, and resistant to the Striga weed, which devastates crops across Africa.
Outside the lab, he helped start the Sudanese commercial seed industry; developed systems to
produce, certify, and market hybrid seeds; and educated farmers about the use of fertilizers and
soil and water conservation. And he has trained and inspired the next generation of African
agricultural scientists.
A COMPREHENSIVE APPROACH: FROM LAB TO FARM TO MARKET TO TABLE
Dr. Ejeta's work reflects the breadth of this issue and the comprehensive approach needed to
address it—one that connects the labs where new seed technologies are developed.., the fields
where small-scale farmers labor to feed their families and make a living.., the markets where
food is bought and sold... and the homes where people get the nourishment they need to thrive.
In many places, that food chain is broken. One billion people worldwide woke up hungry this
morning and will go to sleep hungry tonight. Chronic hunger threatens health, while making it
harder for people to work and students to learn, which in turn stunts economic development.
Last year's food riots demonstrated that when food is scarce, political stability is threatened.
To date, the world's primary response to hunger has been to send emergency food aid. While
this saves lives, it is a short-term fix, and we need a long-term solution.
The Obama Administration is committed to leading in developing a new global approach. We
will support the creation of sustainable agricultural systems in appropriate regions around the
world, to increase agricultural productivity, create jobs, strengthen economies, and protect
natural resources.
We will do this not by imposing one-size-fits-all solutions, but by assisting countries in carrying
out individual strategies that meet their needs—for example, through the Comprehensive Africa
Agriculture Development Plan. To facilitate coordination and share best practices, we will seek
to convene donor governments, multilateral institutions, NG0s, private companies, foundations,
universities, and individuals.
THE ANCHORS OF OUR APPROACH
We've identified seven anchors that secure sustainable agriculture systems. These will guide our
approach.
• Increase agricultural productivity by expanding access to quality seeds, fertilizer,
irrigation, the credit to purchase them, and the training to use them.
• Stimulate the post-harvest sector by improving the storage and processing of food and
improving transportation to connect small farmers to markets.
• Maintain natural resources so the land can be farmed well into the future and we can
make the right adaptations for the changing environment.
• Expand knowledge and training by support R&D and developing the next generation of
agriculture scientists.
• Increase trade so small-scale farmers in developing countries can sell their crops far and
wide.
• Support policy reform and good governance, because sustainable agriculture flourishes in
a clear and predictable policy and regulatory environment.
• Support women and families in agriculture. Seventy percent of the world's farmers are
women, but most of the programs that offer credit and training to farmers target men.
This must change for agriculture to thrive. And children must have nutrition to
contribute to their communities' future.
A PREVIEW OF WHAT'S TO COME
In the coming weeks, President Obama, Secretary Vilsack and I will be reaching out to share our
approach to global coordination and agriculture in greater detail. We will seek the input, wisdom
and guidance of those who have been working so long in this arena—from the Congress to
NGOs to academics to foundations to the private sector. The President's conversations at the G-
8 meeting in Italy in two weeks will address our approach, as well as my trip to Africa in August.
Addressing hunger and food is essential to achieving economic recovery, stabilizing societies,
and expanding opportunity for hundreds of millions of people worldwide. This is why
supporting sustainable agriculture worldwide will be a central element of foreign policy in the
Obama Administration.
CONCLUSION
You can circle back to the story of Dr. Ejeta to close. He represents the need for a multinational
approach: born in Ethiopia, educated in the United States, advised by Indian scientists, advisor
to several African nations.
June 6, 2009 11:30am
Rooney (x7-7203,
CONCEPT NOTE FOR WORLD FOOD PRIZE CEREMONY
Thursday, June 11, 2009
This speech is an opportunity to signal the urgency of the problem of global hunger; connect it to
an array of global issues, including economic development, health and education, expanding
opportunity for women, and political stability; and declare the Administration's commitment to
tackling hunger at its roots, through effective and efficient collaboration with an array of
partners.
Additionally, your remarks can point to a shift from past approaches by emphasizing the need to
support local solutions and focus on long-term sustainability to help people feed themselves and
reduce the need for emergency assistance down the road.
The speech could be framed as follows:
THE PRIZE AND PRIZE-WINNER
You can begin by announcing the winner of the 2009 World Food Prize, Dr. Gebisa Ejeta. He
has a remarkable story: born in a mud hut in Ethiopia, he got his PhD from Purdue University in
plant breeding and genetics and developed strains of sorghum that are drought-tolerant, high-
yield, and resistant to the Striga weed, which devastates crops across Africa.
Outside the lab, he helped start the Sudanese commercial seed industry; developed systems to
produce, certify, and market hybrid seeds; and educated farmers about the use of fertilizers and
soil and water conservation. And he has trained and inspired the next generation of African
agricultural scientists.
A COMPREHENSIVE APPROACH: FROM LAB TO FARM TO MARKET TO TABLE
Dr. Ej eta's work reflects the breadth of this issue and the comprehensive approach needed to
address it—one that connects the labs where new seed technologies are developed.., the fields
where small-scale farmers labor to feed their families and make a living.., the markets where
food is bought and sold... and the homes where people get the nourishment they need to thrive.
In many places, that food chain is broken. One billion people worldwide woke up hungry this
morning and will go to sleep hungry tonight. Chronic hunger threatens health, while making it
harder for people to work and students to learn, which in turn stunts economic development.
Last year's food riots demonstrated that when food is scarce, political stability is threatened.
To date, the world's primary response to hunger has been to send emergency food aid. While
this saves lives, it is a short-term fix, and we need a long-term solution.
The Obama Administration is committed to leading in developing a new global approach. We
will support the creation of sustainable agricultural systems in appropriate regions around the
world, to increase agricultural productivity, create jobs, strengthen economies, and protect
natural resources.
We will do this not by imposing one-size-fits-all solutions, but by assisting countries in carrying
out individual strategies that meet their needs—for example, through the Comprehensive Africa
Agriculture Development Plan. To facilitate coordination and share best practices, we will seek
to convene donor governments, multilateral institutions, NG0s, private companies, foundations,
universities, and individuals.
THE ANCHORS OF OUR APPROACH
We've identified seven anchors that secure sustainable agriculture systems. These will guide our
approach.
• Increase agricultural productivity by expanding access to quality seeds, fertilizer,
irrigation, the credit to purchase them, and the training to use them.
• Stimulate the post-harvest sector by improving the storage and processing of food and
improving transportation to connect small farmers to markets.
• Maintain natural resources so the land can be farmed well into the future and we can
make the right adaptations for the changing environment.
• Expand knowledge and training by support R&D and developing the next generation of
agriculture scientists.
• Increase trade so small-scale farmers in developing countries can sell their crops far and
wide.
• Support policy reform and good governance, because sustainable agriculture flourishes in
a clear and predictable policy and regulatory environment.
• Support women and families in agriculture. Seventy percent of the world's farmers are
women, but most of the programs that offer credit and training to farmers target men.
This must change for agriculture to thrive. And children must have nutrition to
contribute to their communities' future.
A PREVIEW OF WHAT'S TO COME
In the coming weeks, President Obama, Secretary Vilsack and I will be reaching out to share our
approach to global coordination and agriculture in greater detail. We will seek the input, wisdom
and guidance of those who have been working so long in this arena—from the Congress to
NGOs to academics to foundations to the private sector. The President's conversations at the G-
8 meeting in Italy in two weeks will address our approach, as well as my trip to Africa in August.
Addressing hunger and food is essential to achieving economic recovery, stabilizing societies,
and expanding opportunity for hundreds of millions of people worldwide. This is why
supporting sustainable agriculture worldwide will be a central element of foreign policy in the
Obama Administration.
CONCLUSION
You can circle back to the story of Dr. Ejeta to close. He represents the need for a multinational
approach: born in Ethiopia, educated in the United States, advised by Indian scientists, advisor
to several African nations."
32;"On Michael Savage:
Joan wanted everyone to clearly understand before any further discussion occurred with UK that Savage's exclusion
could also have occurred under our legal regime so to the extent we want to suggest to UK that his exclusion on free
speech grounds is inappropriate (or any thing of that like) that we should understand we may appear slightly hypocritical
given our legal regime and actions.
Background on Related Law
B5
B5
B5"
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Saturday, June 06, 2009 4:15 PM
H
info.doc
Just FYI given where you are leaning — I put her resume at the bottom in text in case you want to see on your bb.
cdm"
32;Just seeing - do you want me still to call?
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Wednesday, May 27, 2009 10:18 PM
H
FW: Daniel Yohannes is from Ethiopia"
32;"See below.
cdm"
32;"RELEASE IN PART
B5,B6
See orig traffic b/I mine"
32;Fyi
32;Done - will try to work with your travel sked
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD©state.gov>
Wednesday, May 13, 2009 8:55 PM
FW: Invite: Building a National Strategy for Global Development"
32;FYI
32;FYI
32;FYI
32;"Cheryl Mills
Thursday, May 14, 2009 9:33 PM
FW: Thanks
fyi"
32;"Cheryl Mills
Thursday, May 14, 2009 9:34 PM
FW: the Cable""
fyi"
32;"Cheryl Mills <
Thursday, May 14, 2009 9:57 PM
FW: 624,000 more hours of productivity at State
Fobs for Everyone short (1).docx
FYI — we're going to get a short video from you that we'll put on our site announcing this. It's also one of the
ideas we can use for how we are reforming the department for the reform committee.
cdm"
32;"sure -- bottom line - you need a special security code to get on line from a computer outside the building. Only 1 in 5 of
our employees has gotten the device (fob) that allows you to do this access.
This effort is making sure they get fobs into the hands of more (or all) employees so folks can work from home thereby
increasing productivity substantially since the 4 in 5 essentially do no work from home once they leave the building until
they get in again b/c they don't have access to their email.
cdm"
32;"fixed.
speaking with Paul - just blind copied you on something re: global health.
otherwise, rest will keep.
cdm"
32;"FYI in case there is anything you want me to address — Alec and I meet weekly and have been driving toward a
plan for how he will deploy his time and resources. This is his first pass on which we are meeting to discuss
tomorrow.
cdm"
32;"Cheryl Mills
Thursday, May 14, 2009 10:40 PM
RE: 624,000 more hours of productivity at State
B6
cdm"
32;"B6
yes"
32;3pm
32;Heads up
32;fyi
32;fyi
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Monday, June 08, 2009 5:21 AM
Fw: 1 page trip report from china, korea, and rome
China.Korea.Rome Trip Report6.7.09.docx
See AMS trip summary WI"
32;
32;Will take care of it.
32;Precursor to earlier email I sent you
32;"Cheryl Mills <
Monday, June 8, 2009 10:00 PM
H
B6
B6
HRC:
Gave your email to David Axe;
We are notifying 9/11 families in am on prisoner transfer;
B5
Spoke to
cdm
ho wants to talk about other opportunities at State – see below:"
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Saturday, May 16, 2009 4:34 PM
FW: NYTimes - Utah Governor to Become Ambassador to China
fvi"
32;"Thoughts?
Will call you around 720 am"
32;Fyi
32;"cheryl.mills
Sunday, May 17, 2009 11:44 AM
H
Re: Early Draft: International Energy Coordinator
Sent via BlackBerry by AT&T"
32;"Fyi
Sent via BlackBerry by AT&T"
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Monday, May 18, 2009 8:39 AM
H
Abedin, Huma
Toni Verstandig FYI
I spoke to Toni this morning
cdm
22"
32;"Importance: High
FYI"
32;fvi
32;"Fyi
alal•••••■•••■•■•■•
■
•1*"
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Tuesday, June 16, 2009 7:07 AM
FW: Late night call with Michele Pierre Louis
FYI below
1.4(D)
B1
cdm"
32;FYI
32;calling you now
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Tuesday, June 16, 2009 11:08 PM
Fw: Remarks by President Obama and Prime Minister Berlusconi in press availability,
6/15/09
See below - just spoke to denis. Calling
B6"
32;FYI
32;FYI
32;
32;FYI
32;Fyi
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Thursday, June 18, 2009 9:35 PM
Fw: NYT
Fyi"
32;See below
32;FYI below — we are working on Acting.
32;"See below
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.goy>
Friday, June 19, 2009 7:27 AM
FW: Stanford Law Connection - A GLIFA Thank you email
B6"
32;FYI
32;Yeah!
32;Fyi
32;FYI
32;FYI
32;FYI below
32;Fyi
32;Fyi
32;"RELEASE IN PART
B5, B6"
32;"Huma:
Please print for HRC.
Thanks.
cdm
50"
32;"Longtime Clinton confidant Blumenthal to become Clinton advisor
Tue, 06/23/2009 - 1:00pm
Longtime journalist and former Clinton White House advisor Sidney Blumenthal will become a special advisor
without portfolio to Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, The Cable has learned. Blumenthal refused to comment.
But sources say he is filling out the paperwork and disentangling himself from other obligations as he moves to
become a special advisor to the secretary whose presidential campaign he helped advise. The position would
not require Senate confirmation.
Clinton, who is recovering from surgery to repair a broken elbow, has been building her team at the State
Department, while establishing her credentials as a team player supporting and amplifying her former
presidential rival's foreign-policy vision. Sources close to her says she will prove indispensable to Obama, a
point several Obama aides also made to Politico's Ben Smith in a piece noting the relatively background role
she has played in these early months. The planned addition of Blumenthal, a longtime confidant of the Clinton
family and a fierce defender of Bill Clinton's presidential legacy, could indicate she plans to raise her profile.
(Blumenthal is probably Clinton's best speechwriter, a friend notes.)
In the foreign-policy arena, Blumenthal advised former President Clinton on U.S.-British relations, and first
introduced him to future British Prime Minister Tony Blair. He has also been active in the Third Way-
Progressive Governance process. A former Washington Post reporter, Blumenthal has contributed
commentary and editorial advice to Vanity Fair, Tina Brown's new online magazine The Daily Beast, the New
Yorker, and Salon. Blumenthal has also been a fellow at New York University's Center on Law and Security.
Laura Rozen I Permalink I fA9ç%'1 Comments? Login or register
52"
32;Fyi below - did not come up at the briefing.
32;"FYI —Spoke to INR Team (about 100 folks) today b/c they were concerned about their value and folks
impression of their work and commitment bic of the Myers matter.
cdm"
32;Great - will call you b/f noon
32;Read traffic all the way down
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD©state.gov>
Thursday, July 02, 2009 3:24 PM
Fw: 2009-07-01 Draft letter to G0h re 57m pledge (4)
2009-07-01 Draft letter to G0h re 57m pledge (4).docx
Draft of cable going to preval in advance of our visit.
I don't know what would take so long to begin. B5
Cdm"
32;FYI — See article below
32;FYI
32;"Fyi
Sent via BlackBerry by AT&T"
32;A)
32;"Fyi
Sent via BlackBerry by AT&T"
32;"Fyi
B6"
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Thursday, June n, 2009 5:42 AM
Fw: COS call 6/10/09
Fyi"
32;!?
32;My question exactly - sent to bill
32;"I have just asked for the state of play this am as messages continued last night until lam.
The bottom line of all of them was not dissimiliar to this message from torn so forwarding this one - namely, all had been
unsuccessful in dissuading Zeleya from going today and several leaders and fm (espinoza) thought call from you might
help but Zeleya appeared in update messages to get more resolute as evening went on to return based upon readouts of
various meetings with him.
Cdm"
32;"I just spoke to torn (see b/1)..
•He thinks for the moment a call by you is not indicated - first, Zeleya was unpersuadable by 2am by even his closet allies
and second, torn said folks appear to stepping away from him.
He intends to fly mid-day so there will be plenty of time for more discussion over next several hours.
Cdm"
32;Will call you now
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sunday, July 05, 2009 11:09 AM
Fw: Security Situation
Fyi - calling you"
32;As prelude
32;Fyi
32;"B6
Here's what likely makes the most sense.
I will feel out re whehter he would like to take this on and if so, what time he could give to it.
We set up a town hall with building for weds or thurs at which you announce the effort. This gives philippe and pj the
b/g of week to lay press ground work so we get the coverage we want.
If this makes sense to you, I am going to reach out to
Cdm"
32;You will get a draft of speech tomorrow - will go through list of recs and discuss with jack/jake
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sunday, July 05, 2009 8:37 PM
Sullivan, Jacob J
Fw: Conference call
Fyi"
32;Fyi
32;Fyi B6
32;"Taking off now.
Talked to jake and derek - draft will be to you in am b/c they are doing so changes today. We'll get to you by email and
hard copy by 9am
86"
32;
32;
32;We have - you said it was you - this was an fyi
32;See traffic below — read down to first email
32;
32;"See below
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Thursday, July 09, 2009 7:29 AM
H
FYI"
32;Interesting take on China below.
32;Confidential fyi on traffic VI - didn't know you asked him to stay and want to know why ...
32;"Justin:
Strobe's edits for WJC to see.
cd m
B6"
32;Confidential fyi
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, May 29, 2009 5:43 AM
Fw: FW: Frame
Fyi •
Jim's thoughts on
Cdm"
32;Read through - nice complement to jose's induction to the process
32;"We can leave then for now - we can work around as nee be and they have a few connections to companies we don't.
Asked philippe for a plan - he may want to sole source it to get the coverage but if not, yes.
Cdm"
32;"Fyi
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Saturday, July 11, 2009 7:48 AM
Fw: Congratulations!"
32;See b/I
32;
32;FYI
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, May 29, 2009 2:45 PM
williamsbarreti
FW: book deal
B6
FYI:"
32;
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sunday, April 26, 2009 9:55 PM
H
FW: VET: Arturo Valenzuela
cdm"
32;"Where are you on it - will you have a revised version today to give direction of your desires?
At moment we have addl comments in from a derek, sandy, george (on mep), dennis r, ams and we are holding off
doing a new draft until we get a sense from you about your edits.
Cdm"
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Monday, April 27, 2009 11:24 AM
H
FW: Handover in SCA - May 15"
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Monday, April 27, 2009 2:19 PM
H
FW.
CV Apr09.doc"
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Thursday, June 25, 2009 4:41 PM
Fw: note to S
Fyi - a clas version will come in hard copy in your pouch tonight"
32;Sending now - their will be a series of emails
32;"Per your request — here are AMS' comments in text and general below.
Oscar should print for you so you can see the red-line as it will not show up on your bb.
cdm"
32;"See comments on AMS document I left on you chair today.
Jim and torn F comments in email below.
Cdm"
32;"Derek's comments — again in redline in text so Oscar should print so you can see them.
cdm"
32;Fyi
32;FYI
32;"Dennis comments below and but primarily in text in track changes.
cdm"
32;"Jim's comments on the same draft — also in track changes in text.
cdm"
32;"Below are PJ's comments/edits in this email (i.e., no attachment).
All of Sandy's were incorporated in the draft you have except his point
that: ""Finally, there needs to be a key para that sets forth the lens through which through which you want the speech to
be seen.""
We actually are still awaiting George's comments on ME para.
cdm"
32;Pat and I are looking at this will check in am B5
32;"Fyi below
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Wednesday, April 29, 2009 3:18 AM
Fw: Major Economies Forum"
32;"Fyi
Mills, Cheryl
Wednesday,
H
Fw: Meeting
D <MiflsCD@state.gov>
April 29, 2009 3:44 AM
tomorrow"
32;Fyi
32;Per your strobe request regarding a june meet with board
32;"either works -- I can talk now and I can talk tomorrow am too - you want me to call?
cdm"
32;"Denis had not told me he told him - more later Sent via BlackBerry by AT&T
B6"
32;See traffic from bottom up
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, June 12, 2009 8:44 PM
Fw: the secretary's speech
See below - this guy who has been doing so much of the work is great - we lose him in aug b/c-
\ want to make sure you meet him !gf he goes."
32;"-
RELEASE IN PART
B6"
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Saturday, June 13, 2009 1:36 PM
Fw: B6
Fyi"
32;Why? B/c it reminds you of someone we now and love - aka you? :)
32;"Fyi - iam going to ask her to head up the qddr organization process with and on diplomacy.side
we're looking but will be desi• nated to be second to that person - on develpoment this woman
that jack and I interviewed and maybe if she will and the the advisory groups we discussed. Will fill you in as
we know more by monday"
32;Do you want anyone added or deleted?
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sunday, June 28, 2009 12:44 PM
Sullivan, Jacob
Fw: Honduran President Zelaya Reportedly Seized by Armed Forces
Fyi"
32;Fyi
32;"HRC:
Below is the recommended guest list for the August 17 Education Dinner. I solicited input from Nina F, AMS,
and John. I think it's a good list but you should look through it — it's long (19) b/c there likely will be a large
number who will not be available in August given the academic calendar. We will work our way down it to get
12-14 outside attendees leaving about 6 seats for State.
The guest list includes university and college presidents, scholars, public intellectuals and journalists who have
thought creatively about the role higher education is playing and could play as part of ""smart diplomacy"".
Once you sign off on this guest list for invitations (so add or subject any), I will work with Anne-Marie to
discuss format and assignments for folks for speaking."
32;"cheryl.mills B6
Sunday, August 2, 2009 8:50 AM
H
Re: Higher Education Dinner on August 17 - Proposed Guest List
Got it - let me work on list - we do have one comm college pres:
B5
Will do rest
Sent via BlackBerry by AT&T"
32;
32;FYI
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sunday, August 02, 2009 4:04 PM
H
Fw: A possible candidate B6
CV.doc; hort bio.pdf
Fyi"
32;See below
32;In the good news department...
32;Yes - I have a call with at 845 so can call after that
32;Was on calls late neg prss lang on our issues
32;FYI
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Tuesday, August 04, 2009 3:28 AM
H
Abedin, Huma
updates
1.
2. give him through his current undertaking b/f he has to discuss - I said he had until fri"
32;Fyi
32;"8/4/09
Candidates B5
B6
We recommend interviewing the following candidates, in priority order:
Other candidates we considered include:
AL"
32;Fyi
32;Fyi
32;FYI
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Tuesday, August 04, 2009 8:16 PM
H
Sullivan, Jacob J; Abedin, Huma
Fw: How did we do?
Fyi"
32;67
32;fyi
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Wednesday, August 05, 2009 11:39 AM
H
FW: Higher Education Dinner on August 17 - Guest
HRC:
Added I
In speaking to John he pointed out that frame is also to have some of the larger institutions to do and create
development in Africa and other countries and they must see themselves as having obligation of being part of solution.
See list."
32;See traffic
32;fvi
32;FYI
32;"Which is how the attached you tube video of you boogieing (quite well by the way) at Canivore.
You shake your tail feathers girl!
cdm"
32;"See b/I
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Thursday, July 16, 2009 7:04 AM
Sullivan, Jacob J
Fw: Speech"
32;"FYI
B6"
32;FYI
32;"of the World organization)
(and a member of her original Students
is one of the Americans who accidently
crossed the border---
FYI"
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, August 07, 2009 7:14 AM
H
Fw: My e-mail is up!
At usaid at last"
32;I met with annmaura this week - see VI
32;"I am out of the country until August 14. I will have intermittent access to email until that time. If you need immediate
assistance, please call Joanne laszczych at 202-647-5548. If you need me urgently, I can be reached through State
Department Ops.
Otherwise, I will respond when I have access to email.
Thank you.
cdm"
32;
32;"Seel:Wire
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Tuesday, August 11, 2009 4:21 PM
H
Fw: B6
- thoughts?"
32;See traffic b/I
32;
32;Fyi
32;For sign off
32;
32;Fyi
32;"See traffic b/I
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Thursday, August 13, 2009 4:06 AM
H
Fw: Guidance Please"
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Thursday, August 13, 2009 12:59 PM
H
Re: Mr.Yoo"
32;"I am traveling overseas and only have intermittent access to my email.
I will return on August 14.
cdm"
32;Agree - philippe?!
32;Scroll all the way down for statement
32;Dyi
32;Remind me to discuss with you
32;"Importance:
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sunday, August 16, 2009 4:38 AM
H
Fw: Burma: CODEL Webb meeting with Aung San Suu Kyi
High
Fyi
08/15/2024"
32;See Mon B6
32;"FYI.
I knoW and would not do her."
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, July 17, 2009 12:57 PM
H
FW: sister-in-law
fyi"
32;"fyi
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, July 17, 2009 10:45 PM
FW: from today's Financial Times...."
32;Not sure - we have seeking to do so with Jack who is working on it
32;just seeing — am up and on line — will also try calling you when looks like down time on your calendar
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Tuesday, August 18, 2009 8:51 PM
H
Sullivan, Jacob J
Fw: Meeting with Honduran de factos
Fyi"
32;"Per our conversation
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Tuesday, July 21, 2009 5:37 PM
H
FW: Ex-U.S. Diplomat Talks With Hamas"
32;"Fyi
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Tuesday, August 18, 2009 8:56 PM
H
Fw: Good news from japan newt"
32;Remind me to discuss this with you.
32;"Is on board.
I also spoke to ams so he is at our disposal.
Are there matters you want me to get him started?"
32;I can dO a meeting on Saturday am if that works or Sunday am. Which is better for you?
32;Jack and I are trying to get him on calendar for Thurs
32;"Are you fine with that?
cdm
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, July 24, 2009 5:43 PM
H
Title Issue
286"
32;"Let me know if today or tomorrow works for you (or if you would rather find time monday).
I have a dinner at 5pm I have to get my house ready for so my best times are 13/f 2pm today or anytime tomorrow.
Cdm
290"
32;Great
32;Yes
32;Fyi
32;Fyi
32;Fyi
32;"Sorry I missed you last night —
Issues:
Personnel
Other Issues:
Support Needs for Dialogs
Monthly Thinking Group — Politically/Positionally -- [Sandy Berger, Vartan Gregorian, John Podesta, Jim
Kennedy, Minyon Moore, Strobe Talbott, Maggie Williams,]
Agenda — what do you want to claim — non-pro; development reform; NK?
Education Initiative:
• Dinner on 18 August
• Goal would be to begin implementing strategy of getting thinking per JS memo: the role higher education is and
can play as part of ""smart diplomacy"", including development to enhance the network or relationships between
countries and peoples to elevate the conditions and capacities of peoples around the world.
• Potential guest list:"
32;"Text of attachment below:
To: Cheryl Mills, COS"
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Tuesday, July 28, 2009 9:22 PM
H
FW: Secretary of State's visit to Africa
FYI"
32;
32;Fyi
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Wednesday, August 19, 2009 10:11 PM
H
Fw: ANGOLA TO RECEIVE $500 MILLION INVESTMENT FROM RUSSIA"
32;Fyi
32;"So you see the traffic when I stepped in - scroll down to pj.
Cdm"
32;See below - are you fine with this revised draft?
32;No - it was collaborative effort -- he put in the edits but he didn't draft it.
32;FYI
32;FYI
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Thursday, September 17, 2009 9:31 PM
H
FW: Packer Article
BEST COPY
AVAILABLE
FYI — see nriainpl rnpssagR"
32;FYI
32;I'm at the office reviewing the first draft of the paper so will call in a bit.
32;FYI
32;We'll set up a call so all can join -- what time? •
32;Not from me - he has put in edits - tracking Jake down now to make sure nothing else from him
32;He thinks there is limited hope for this and had an alternative strategy. Will discuss
32;"H RC:
FYI. This is my point.
cdm"
32;Fyi
32;"Fyi - see b/I
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Saturday, August 22, 2009 4:41 AM
H
Fw: AMCIT suspected of abuse of minors in Liberia"
32;fyi
32;See below my email
32;More
32;FYI
32;Fyi
32;FYI B6
32;Fyi
32;Fine with me -- I'll give him a call - he won't have an opinion on who should be his deputy though.
32;"Trying to see if I can.
cdm"
32;FYI traffic from bottom up
32;
32;FYI
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Monday, October 19, 2009 6:27 PM
H
FW: Resume and Other Matters
FYI"
32;fyi
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Tuesday, October 20, 2009 7:35 AM
H
RE: Resume and Other Matters B6
worked for John P during our administration - you'd recall him if you saw him"
32;"FYI — b/1 in process
Cheryl Mills
Thursday, September 3, 2009 11:32 PM
H
FW:
B6
B6"
32;Fyi
32;"suicide
Importance: High
FYI"
32;FYI
32;"See below for discussion.
I think we are going to need to be very specific about limiting more of her activities in the building than she suggests b/c
as is, she is in many matters here too that are very consuming.
cdm"
32;"Fyi
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Saturday, September 05, 2009 7:37 AM
H
Fw: Possible Rieser Call on Foreign Ops Bill"
32;FYI
32;Fyi
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Saturday, September 05, 2009 8:20 AM
H
Fw:
Remind me to discuss with you how I want to play this out.
Cdm"
32;"Will call you around 530
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Saturday, September 05, 2009 11:48 AM
H
Re:"
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Monday, August 24, 2009 12:22 PM
Abedin, Huma
H
FW: Call Request: Senator Harkin for S - CDM PREVIEW ON WHAT HE MAY BE
CALLING ABOUT.
Tom
He and I are meeting about staffing this week when he is in town."
32;Per our discussion
32;Do you want him to have your email?
32;K - will give to him directly
32;See section on what opponents might say
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Tuesday, August 25, 2009 5:09 AM
H
Fw: REVISED Call Sheet S UNSYG UNGA
Call Sheet S UNSYG UNGA.docx
See WI - huma will print and provide call sheet"
32;"Cheryl Mills <cheryl.mills( B6
Sunday, September 6, 2009 9:09 AM
H
'Sullivan, Jacob J'
FW: Informal Note on S and CTBT Article XIV Conference Participation
0904 Informal Note to S Staff on Article XIV Conference.docx
Hillary:
Below and attached is a note on CTBT Conference. After reviewing, see if you think it makes sense for you to
attend. We do and have vetted the idea with others. Of note is that this would be on 24 Sept after the President
has chaired the Non-Proliferation Security Council Meeting so it will be amplifying his remarks. We also will
have to think through, if you do this, what the Hill angle is but we think there is a good case to be made for it so
we will want to discuss with you this week.
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED
INFORMAL NOTE FOR THE SECRETARY'S STAFF
FROM: T Front Office
SUBJECT: The Secretary's Participation in the CTBTO Article XIV Conference
Purpose of the CTBTO Article XIV Conference
B5
The Secretary's Message
1.4(
1.4(
B1
B5
Conclusion"
32;"Have kidlets beside me so will call later
Cdm"
32;Anything on your call with him you want me to followup on?
32;fyi
32;"Immigrant Visa Services in Honduras
FYI"
32;fyi
32;Fyi
32;Fyi
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Wednesday, August 26, 2009 5:30 AM
H
Fw: Wheels-Up for OAS Mission in Honduras at 1858 Eastern"
32;Will call as I drive in about 20 min
32;
32;Got it - will get a new draft
32;FYI
32;"See WI
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Wednesday, August 26, 2009 8:39 PM
H
Fw:"
32;Fyi
32;"RELEASE IN PART
B5,B6
Fyi"
32;No - he's supposed to call me first
32;"FYI
----Griginal Message--
Slaughter, Anne-Marie
Sent: Friday, September 18, 2009 "",j.37 PM
Huma
Cc: Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob i
Subject: For S rothkopf review of her speech on foreign policy blog
If u go to the actual website it has a great pie.
Who says eAi good c.,,
,Acv changes come in with a bang? Fri, 09/18/2009 - 5:53pm
important shifts in U.S. policy come quietly. They don't make the evening news. They don't reverberate in
the blogosphet.e. rhey j,.st creep in and gradually take effect. But their consequences can be far-reaching.
Tuk,;cay, arzo:.Julz. 'State Hilary Clinton gave an address discussing U.S. priorities for the UN
Gen.,
ral Asseinhly meeting next 'vcr;.. S;.ie focused on non-proliferation and, naturally, by extension, Iran. But then, in
answer to a :-
.1m,stio;-i, she gave an anSwer that one top State Department official characterized as ""historic"" because it
""Oir tilt t;r:it coll.uption as a national security rather than just as a 'good governance' issue.""
coniak?.,.rt i-esonates on several leVeli. On the one, perhaps ciosest to today's headlines, it ties in directly to the
e,
;ep31
-t: icientffie,z, abuse of government power in Afghanistan as an equal threat to the insurgency. As
such it sends a very powerful message to the Karzai government that unless they seriously clean up their act they could
go '1.com aeirig centcai oi. allied e
-ncorts in their country to being a target of our efforts to promote change.
Corrupzort ,s the file's blood of many of the most substantial national security
thear:r the COACeril is iilegal arms sales or proliferation of weapons ofmass
d,,st-ilrVon, terrorism or insurgencits, government stability or functioning free markets, public health or public safety,
drug:,or num& -sat'nciz:np„ H.-1011 cion't it:lei-lay and battle corruption true progress is impossible. As such, to shrug it off
as n 'de; thus guar.;nteeing ft never once gets the attention of senior officials or the resources required
to address it -- ran woise„ to simply ;;LEggFsv it is endemic the world over and simply a way business gets done among
eift.s-s;ksz:iPci:.41,;in F:nleq'ing oir.:(1d. IS simply reckless.
:"",e; . • is V, eie.ment of top national security threats ... requires far more than
ei'n.
,;•ts capabilities of NZ:10s like Transparency International. It is a job that on the
i;;;teligence ',..'esources to identify and track targets and on the other demands the
i■wC.Ivt;Ire■q i; t.e,
:asiSe many of those who an:, the offenders, like Karzai, are senior officials, top
terry-1st or crimli.:3i syndicates. These are the not-so-super members of what I called in my last
elnablers and beneficiaries of some of the most dangerous types of
r • ' • ; ?
Ind COMOrcy, remarks are important. But if she and the
auin;nscra,:ion ;.,,an sy.sternati,;aini go after the Co( Nption that is linked to many if not most of our greatest
international concerns, if her casual remark is indicative of a new resolve to confront this threat (best described for the
world in FP editorin-chief Moises Nia!ni's definitive work on the subject Illicit) then it is one of the few examples I can
thiri4 i ' .Dower"" that real deserves that description."
32;"JP ISt fyi — 1 am CI4ra it will h fin"" Plifarthtally
B6
Flrorn carter, Pat
Sent: Friday, September 18, 2009 1;48 PM
To: Samuelson, Heather F; Pe** Laura
Cc: Kennedy, Patrick F
r I;Ii.ti r:..tri no, il,co.r.t.ww.4.1
FYI — interim clearance denieu.
NOTIFICATI:ON
Ctii-zzity II
In't:e,*('!1.2irance Denied -
Pr,rr:,
..lant to your request, and in .,Jr.xordance with E
xecutive Order 12968, Section 3.3, your request to grant an
ittedm clearance to i3 denied. Due to the fact this is not a final security clearance
d-.‘termination. a decision not to „rant an interim clearance is not subject to appeal under the provisions of the
i; 6 3,:o negKive inference .ha'
..). -made regarding the denial of an individual's interim clearance, which
solely mean,
: thatthere irwestigative work that must take place in the US or abroad that will take additional
tiorf to -
...or.nply v.7'
.,:th national standard.s prior to a final clearance determination being made.
ma`' net &sowed acc?.,sE, to classified information until the appropriate investigation is
a firia' cluo.ision is made.
clAr Customer Service Center toll-free at 1-866-643-INFO(4636), or
..so.
.;2.rilirc;teanncegstatexov,
Nate. '1,""'hi7 is n F,ff,
id-only,emailr rile,ase do not reply to this message.
C,.41c.;:-; of anti
oi
7.1"
32;Not sure - they will advise
32;Will call you shortly - we're trying to fig out later in the day
32;Fyi - left messages for him on cell.
32;FYI - see traffic below
32;FYI B6
32;FYI
32;FYI
32;FYI
32;"FYI
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Tuesday, September 08, 2009 12:46 PM
H
FW: 9/8 Senior Staff and Deputies Meetings"
32;FYI
32;"B6
RELEASE IN
PART B5,B6"
32;FYI
32;"sorry - just seeing b/c on my but have logged a call to him.
On Sat, Oct 9, 2010 at 7:18 AM, H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
Could you try to contact Mark Penn to confirm he no longer represents Thaksin before I call Thai PM at 9:30?
Thx."
32;fyi
32;Yes and then you should announce it.
32;I can have it announced here on Monday - can't today
32;FYI
32;2cin
32;"09/22/2019
FYI"
32;FYI -- this is not us doing this.
32;FYI
32;Are you free now? What number?
32;FYI
32;RELEASE IN PART B6
32;"cheryl.mill _
Saturday, August 29, 2009 5:41 AM
H
Fw: Other USAID names
Sent via BlackBerry by AT&T"
32;K
32;FYI
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Saturday, August 29, 2009 6:20 AM
H
Sullivan, Jacob J
Fw: Honduras Military Coup Decision
See WI - will call you later today to discuss my convs on this matter"
32;Fyi
32;Fyi
32;FYI
32;FYI
32;
32;
32;Whoo hoo
32;Fyi
32;Will call you around 3pm
32;"Take a look —we are now eliminating Saturday but agenda is here:
Senior Leadership Retreat
Department of State
Blair House
October 2, 2009
Notional Timeline
8:00am: Continental Breakfast
8:15am: Welcome [HRC]
8:25am: Overview and Strategic Objectives for Retreat [CDM]
8:30am: Foreign Policy in the Obama Administration [HRC]
o priorities]
• Our Accomplishments To Date
o [HRC uses as opportunity to celebrate what has been
accomplished and call out areas for recognition -show
appreciation for work that has been done and set the tone of
appreciation, collaboration, team approach to success]
8:50am: Funding our Needs and Ambitions - State/USAID Budgets
• Presentation by Jack Lew [10 minutes]
o New Processes and Protocols for Implementing 2010
o Expectations for 2011
o Expectations for State/USAID approach
• Moderated Q and A by Lew with Greene, Smith, other appropriate
support [10 minutes]
9:25am: QDDR: Restoring Diplomacy/Elevating Development
• Introduction by Jack Lew [5 minutes]
• Presentation by Anne Marie Slaughter/Alonzo Fulgrum
[10 minutes]
• Moderated Questions and Answers [20 minutes]
o Lew to moderate discussion
o Alonzo/AMS/Jim Michel to field questions
o HRC field questions as approach in instances where she wants
to make or emphasize a point
10:05am: Seizing the Day - Immediate and Long-term Opportunities
• Intro of topic by CDM [5 min]:
1. What are 3 opportunities that State/USAID/MCC (or any
individually) have
2. How specifically would we implement each one
• Break out session - 30 minutes (4 groups of 17), with designated
staff member facilitator and note-taker
10:45am Coffee Break
11:00am Traditional Threat: Security Peace in the Middle East
• Introduction by HRC [5 min: praise/validation for team]
• Presentation by George Mitchell [10 minutes]
• Moderated [Mara Rudman] Questions and Answers [15 min]
o recognize Mitchell team to permit them to respond to
questions with George
11:30am Transnational Threat: Non-Proliferation (or alternatives below)
• Introduction by HRC [5 min: praise/validation for team]
• Presentation by Ellen Tauscher [other options: climate change,
energy security, global health, others]
• Moderated [TBD] Questions and Answers [15 minutes]
o recognize T team to permit them to respond to questions with
Ellen
12:15: Lunch
• Introduction by CDM [5 min]
• 21st Century State Craft - Alec Ross [10 min]
• [No Q/A or Q/A]
1:15pm Partnering for Success - Paradigms and Pitfalls
• Introduction by: TBD [5 min]
• Breakout into 4 Groups of 17 with facilitator and note-taker [40 min]
• Whole of State/USAID/MCC Approach
• Partnering and Leading Through the Interagency
• Regional and Functional Bureaus - Ensuring Connections
• In-Country USG Coordination - the Art of the Possible?
2:00pm
2:30pm
Traditional Threat: Iran is Not Ten Feet Tall
• Introduction by HRC [5 min: praise/validation for team]
• Presentation by Bill Burns [10 min] [other options: Af/Pak, North
Korea, Iraq]
• Moderated [by Jeff Feltman] Questions and Answers [15 minutes]
o recognize Iran team to permit them to respond to questions
with Bill
Transnational Threat: Health in a Global Age [alternatives b/l]
• Introduction by HRC [5 min: praise/validation for team]
• Presentation by TBD/USAID [10 min] [other options: climate
change, energy security, others]
• Moderated [TBD] Questions and Answers [15 minutes]
o recognize team to permit them to respond to questions with
presenter
3:00pm Coffee Break
3:15pm Traditional Threat: North Korea - Moving Forward or Not?
• Introduction by HRC [5 min: praise/validation for team]
• Presentation by Jim Steinberg [10 min] [other option: Iraq]
• Moderated [by Kurt Campbell/Phil Goldberg] Questions and Answers
[15 minutes]
o recognize North Korea team to permit them to respond to
questions with Jim
3:45pm: Presentation of Working Group Findings
• Presentation by Group Facilitator (or Other) of Lessons and Best
Practices [5 min per group]
o Whole of State/USAID/MCC
o Partnering and Leading Through the Interagency
o Regional and Functional Bureaus - Ensuring Connections
o In-Country USG Coordination - the Art of the Possible?
• Q/A Moderated by CDM [15 min]
4:20pm Working Group Presentations of the Opportunities Ahead
• Presentation by Group Facilitator (or Other) of Opportunities and
Actions Needed [5 min per group]
• Q/A Moderated by CDM [15 min]
5:10pm: The Challenges on the Horizon [HRC]
• HRC expresses appreciation for work done today
• Outlines the Challenges Ahead
• Seeks Investment and Commits to Follow-Up
• Invites Participants and Partners to Whitehaven at 7:30pm
5:30pm: Retreat Concludes until Dinner
7:30pm Dinner at Whitehaven Residence
Staff and Partner/Spouses invited
Buffet Dinner - No formal remarks"
32;FYI
32;"1. he's coming entire day now.
2. okay"
32;FYI
32;"Got it.
Sending you shortly the current list of invitees — take a quick look and make sure no one is missing."
32;FYI
32;"FYI
B6"
32;Fyi
32;Fyi
32;Fyi
32;Fyi
32;Fyi
32;"Holbrooke's Contributions on Af/Pak
Holbrooke has assembled an unprecedented interagency team to carry out the work on
Af/Pak — a whole-of-government team in DC and a reorganized and reenergized U.S.
mission in Kabul.
Holbrooke's team is actually getting things done, including the implementation of more
than 20 detailed action plans. Some examples of the work thus far:
• The civilian surge in Afghanistan is on pace to meet targets by end of year.
• Our approach to assistance in Afghanistan has changed dramatically, both through the
consolidation of efforts under Tony Wayne and the review (and sometimes rejection) of
assistance contracts.
•
• Holbrooke has opened and is actively pursuing R/R channels.
• The swift and comprehensive U.S. response helped alleviate and reduce the impact of the
Swat refugee crisis.
•
• The trilateral meetings have helped create conditions for progress on key cross-border
issues.
)11
• Holbrooke's international diplomacy — in the Gulf, with China, with the cadre of other
special representatives — has translated into funding and equipment commitments, more
buy-in, and more patience.
Holbrooke has been a key driver of (non-military) strategic innovation in Afghanistan and
Pakistan. Here are some examples:Ill
Defining a regional approach to Af/Pak (including trilateral summits)
• The regional approach championed by Holbrooke became a central feature of the Reidel
report; the trilats are a pure Holbrooke invention
Afghanistan
The clearest voice and thinker on swifter and more heavily resourced ""Afghanization"" -
primarily by standing up a sufficiently large and sufficiently capable ANSF — as the preferable
alternative to adding more troops.
• The Reidel report calls for training 134,000 army and 82,000 police over two years;
Holbrooke is working through a strategy that would more than double those numbers and
speed the pace of training. Such a strategy has to resolve significant obstacles,
particularly with respect to the police.
Framing and executing the U.S. approach to Afghan elections:
•
Developing a strategy — in partnership with the Afghan government and others — for pursuing
reconciliation/reintegration.
• The Reidel report discusses support for the Afghan government's efforts to reintegrate
""non ideologically-committed"" insurgents who lay down their arms, renounce al Qaeda,
and accept the Afghan Constitution. Holbrooke was key in developing this aspect of the
report, and is now working through the next phases.
Prioritizing a shift in emphasis on counternarcotics from eradication to interdiction
• The Reidel report discusses the need for increased interdiction efforts — and the attendant
need to support licit agriculture to shift livelihoods.
Emphasizing and executing our engagement with Arab allies, China, and Turkey
• The Reidel report speaks generally about engaging all those with a stake in the region. It
does not lay out a specific diplomatic strategy or priority countries.
• [NOTE:
• This issue does not get extensive treatment in the Reidel report.
Pakistan
• The Reidel report does not speak in any detail to this issue.
Responding decisively to the refugee crisis in Swat and Buner
• Obviously, the Reidel report does not address this. The immediate response to the
refugee crisis was Holbrooke's team at its finest.
Making the image of the United States in Pakistan as a critical strategic priority
• The Reidel report focuses on strategic communications in Afghanistan. Holbrooke's
recent trip with Judith McHale is the latest in an ongoing effort to develop a strategic
communications plan for Pakistan. Generally, Holbrooke, along with McDonough, has
been the key mover on all things related to strategic communications in both Afghanistan
and Pakistan; he has a good sense of what is missing and what is needed.
Pursuing a major new energy initiative to address Pakistan's economic troubles and boost
support for the United States
• The Reidel report mentions energy as a key sector where we should be encouraging
foreign investment.
1. References/comparisons to the Reidel report are in italics below each item"
32;"8:30am call with mitchell
9am secure call with jack and cdm to follow 9:30am call with jones 10am call with kouchner Hairdresser coming at
11am We will do a call with melane and pir and I am getting paper for oprah interview.
.an"
32;Potus may call through ops b/w 1 and 6 pm
32;"RELEASE IN PART
B6"
32;Fyi
32;"Per my prior email
Cdm"
32;"See below. Will send PIR comments shortly.
To: CDM
Fr: Caitlin
Re: Branch Book
Overview:
There are few surprises in this book. The ""surprises"" that might exist are buried and took a close reading to pick
up on—the two main ones are about the terror clause of WJC's crime bill and why he hadn't disclosed
information about Lewinsky (because he hadn't wanted to become a witness against her). There are a lot of
things that have been covered in My Life and other publications. Quite honestly the book was pretty boring and
much more focused on Branch than I had anticipated. While not as ""and this day, and the next day"" as My Life,
it does share many of the same elements that would engage only a true Clinton fanatic or historian. The fact that
there appears to be no index also makes it difficult for anyone looking for a quick hit to get one. Furthermore,
WJC's words are so interlaced with Branch's recollection through his dictations, that the number of direct WJC
quotes was far fewer than I had expected.
HRC was not as much of a player as one might imagine. Her role is largely seen through her interactions with
Branch when he is recording WJC. Her statements were consistent with the past, with the exception of the
Gephardt comment, and didn't grab much attention at all.Ell (Others included HRC's devotion to CVC, thought
that there should not be a special prosecutor and images of her returning from meetings. They were pretty much
aligned with her interactions with Branch.) Surprisingly, or not surprisingly, many of the problems discussed in
the book are those, which face the current Administration—Middle East peace, North Korea, China, etc...
Branch repeatedly injects his feelings on specific subjects and seems to use the book to voice his own opinion
of the Administration and events of the time. He clearly has topics he prefers over others (for example his
connection with the events in Haiti result in a lot of discussion about it), but there are some subjects that are
strikingly sparsely discussed such as Rwanda. Its absence from long discussions was surprising, but it did not
appear as thought WJC ever-dodged questions about the topic, they just weren't addressed. Much like My Life,
one theme that repeated itself was WJC's conflict with and disdain for the media, especially long passages
about NYT and Washington Post. There are a few instances where gives them credit on their reporting, but you
would be hard-pressed to find them. Additionally, there are numerous mentions of WJC's acute allergies and his
chronic fatigue, with imagery of him falling asleep in sessions on more than a couple occasions.
The book has quite a bit on Whitewater, but given the dearth of public documentation there is little that Branch
could write that hadn't been said. One thing I had not recalled was the D'Amato's subpoena of CVC's friends,
later quashed, who slept over while HRC's Rose Law Firm records were in the White House. Branch does
portray a helpful distinction in how WJC looked at Whitewater and other scandals. While WJC attacks
Whitewater as a political hunt, Branch does have him WJC saying that Filegate needed to be separated from
Whitewater, because this was a legitimate inquiry. There are some quips that could catch someone's eye, such
as WJC referring to Paula Jones as ""a 'new bimbo' he [WJC] didn't even recognize.""
Branch does not dwell on Lewinsky or the impeachment. With the exception of Bruce, Bennett and Kendall, no
other lawyers are mentioned. There is one passage that I am looking into, in which WJC says part of the reason
he didn't mention his relationship with Lewinsky at first was because she was being threatened with jail time if
she was found to be lying under oath and had he told the truth he could become a witness against her. This is a
very small passage that could easily be missed, but one that it is important to note as I don't recall hearing this
before. (This is addressed more fully below.)
There are a few relationships that track through the book more than others. They include WJC's relationship
with Gore, which maps in part because it is not a focal point until the end, and his contentious relationship with
Janet Reno. The one Senator that appears to be most discussed negatively is Moynihan. All three of these issues
are discussed in turn below. WJC is portrayed as an extremely loving and attentive father and HRC is portrayed
in a much more human light than other books/articles covering this time period, with ample mention of her
relationship with CVC and images of affection between her and WJC, both pre- and post-impeachment.
On foreign relations there is a lot of time spent discussing the Middle East, Northern Ireland, the Balkans,
China, Russia, Pakistan/India and in the beginning of the book, Haiti. (Note: Much of what is written about
Haiti is about Branch's own experience there and on the subject.) There is also a fair amount of discussion
about North Korea, but nothing that has not been discussed in the past few weeks. Bin Laden is discussed in
what seems to track mention of him in My Life, which seems to have more detail and background than this
book.
In certain cases there is more detail here than in My Life, for example on his trip to Pakistan WJC wrote that the
USSS cancelled one stop because they would be ""defenseless"" flying in, whereas Brach writes that the streets
would be lined with ""assassins."" There are candid looks at WJC's take on certain people and the relationship
between some, such as Albright and Berger's dislike of Holbrooke, and a more detailed depiction of Yeltsin's
drinking, such as yelling outside of Blair House for a cab to get pizza.
One thing to note, is that often times WJC seems to be speaking to Branch intentionally without the recorders
going, but Branch writes about those interactions and exchanges nonetheless. Such is the case with HRC's
Gephardt comment.
The following items are addressed in the memo:
Wen Ho Lee and Terror Clause of Crime Bill 4
WJC and Lewinsky's Silence 4
HRC and Kissinger 4
HRC and gay/lesbian 5
Tension with Moynihan 5
HRC as World Player 5
Jesse Jackson 6
Tension with Janet Reno 6
Portrayal of Carter 7
Relationship with Gore 8
Other (This includes: Maggie recommending Panetta, HRC and Haiti Invasion, ITAV co-author flap,
Subpoenas of CVC's Friends, Vernon Jordan on Extramarital Sex, Gore/HRC ticket, WJC suggesting Rubin run
for Senate, Trip to South Asia) 11
Wen Ho Lee and Terror Clause of Crime Bill
In discussing Wen Ho Lee's release Branch characterizes WJC's lack of knowledge about the strained
interpretation of the anti-terrorist provisions in the crime bill and arbitrary detentions as a ""confession."" My Life
only mentions Lee's accusation in passing and does not again discuss Lee. Below are two passages from
Branch's book the first giving context and the second about the Terror Clause of the Crime Bill.
➢ The year closed on spies and terrorism. The Justice Department, after fierce debate among the security
agencies, indicted nuclear scientist Wen Ho Lee on fifty-nine counts of copying classified material to his
personal computer. Lee was being handled like a radioactive espionage defendant—no bail, lockdown,
solitary confinement—even though the long dragnet had produced no evidence that he offered secrets to
China or anyone else. The president said experts were telling him the worst spies sometimes stored their
treason for a rainy day. This sounded fishy to me. Clinton shrugged. Nothing would please him more
than to establish Lee's innocence. [Branch, 577]
➢ While Lee was indicted, Branch writes that WJC noted that others ""were being held in secret, uncharged
and untried...He [WJC] was embarrassed not to have sponsored this measure into law without
foreseeing such arbitrary detentions...Under the terrorist act, any prosecutor should decide within the
legal limit...whether to bring charges on the testimony of a secret informant or otherwise. To his
dismay, Clinton had learned of defendants held incommunicado for more than six months. One extreme
detention had last three years. 'I think it's wrong,' he [WJC] said. 'It's not American. We accept guilty
people on the street to enjoy and protect our freedom.' [Branch, 629]
WJC and Lewinsky's Silence
Branch writes that part of WJC's motive for not discussing what had happened with Lewinsky was that it could
send her to jail, as she had denied it.
➢ ""Also, he pointed out that Starr had been threatening to jail Lewinsky all year over her sworn denial of
the affair. If Clinton had come forward with anything at all about their relationship, he said Starr could
have turned him into a witness against Lewinsky, betraying her discreet silence. Such subtleties, while
original, struck me as tendentious. The president never claimed chivalry as the real motive for his
steadfast denial, nor did he dispute the essential truth of Lewinsky's account."" [Branch, 511]
HRC and Kissinger
The following could be fodder for people who want to continue to string along the notion of channeling Eleanor
Roosevelt.
➢ There is a passage in which HRC describes an exchange she had with Kissinger at a dinner where he
complained that if the health care bill passed he wouldn't be able to see his own doctor. She continued to
say ""it was interesting, in fact, that she had dreamed about Kissinger only a few nights before. His
visage turned suddenly effervescent at a banquet, announcing gladly that his worries were over because
the Clinton health care bill was dying. 'Oh, no, Dr. Kissinger,' she replied coolly. 'Don't be sure that it's
dead. We'll keep fighting, and there's always light at the end of the tunnel.' She said Kissing blanched,
speechless at her deft reminder of the Vietnam War...Now at last, in Hillary's dream, it registered that
his strategic designs had spewed carnage and venom for seven needless years...'That's what I dreamed,'
Hillary repeated, lost in thought. 'You know, I always get my revenge in dreams, but never in real life.'
[Branch, 179]
HRC and gay/lesbian
Writing about a call with HRC from NYS, Branch recalls how WJC's counsel got very ""exercised."" WJC left
the room. ""He was subdued on his return. 'You know, I've had a lot more contact with gay people in my life
than Hillary.' He sighed. Her temperament had a conservative, religious core, formed before homosexual issues
were even mentionable. New York politics was a tough crucible, and she was unsure what heat she could take.
On the other hand, personal experience could speed adaptation."" [Branch, 551]
Tension with Moynihan
There are several occasions throughout the book that Branch recalls WJC's grievances and frustration with
Moynihan. For example:
> When Moynihan called for the international arms embargo to be unilaterally lifted so that Bosnia could
fight for themselves, Branch writes, ""The president flinched when I mentioned [it]...'That's just a
freebie for him,' snapped Clinton, 'and he knows it.'"" [p.140]
> In regard to health care: ""Echoing comments by Hillary at dinner, he [WJC] faulted Senator Moynihan
for aimless hearings conducted without a strategy or theme."" [p.170]
➢ Discussing Independent Counsel: ""She [HRC] was especially scornful of the Democrats, and quoted a
number of them. Senator Moynihan, for instance, publicly said the Clintons were nice people and he was
sure they had nothing to hide. 'Why not have an investigation?' he often asked. She said Moynihan
skated blithely on the surface, never produced results in Congress, and could not withstand such scrutiny
himself for five minutes, living in an apartment secured through his chairmanship of the Pennsylvania
Avenue Development Corporation."" [Brach, 182]
➢ ""Donnybrook"" argument in which Moynihan said of a fundraising speech WJC gave citing a regretted
hypothetical about a controversial decision. Moynihan told the press, ""He doesn't understand...that he's
conceding the principles."" WJC confronted him about lack of context given to the statement to the press
and said that Moynihan knew what he was doing by ""feeding the beast of hostile presumption about
Clinton's motives."" [Branch, 299]
HRC as World Player
There are several images as HRC as a player on the world stage, both with WJC and on her own. Several
examples follow:
➢ Middle East: Discussing peace with King Hussein: ""They had retreated for lunch as two couples—the
Clintons, with the king and his wife, Queen Noor—in the family dining room... Their agenda was a
delicate race between Hussein's failing health and his desire to make peace with Israel. The president
said he and Hillary pounded away on symptoms of national estrangement: closed boarders, water
disputes, travel barriers, war grievances, contested airspace, sealed electrical grids, and so on. Hussein
gave them a feast of goodwill without commitment on any point."" [Branch, 170]
> South Asia: Regarding her trip to South Asia with CVC in 1995, ""Her [HRC's] schedule was far more
demanding than ceremonial, pushing both conflict resolution and civic empowerment for downtrodden
women."" [Branch, 236] Later Branch tells of Benazir Bhutto praising CVC and HRC. ""By contrast with
a superficial American press, which portrayed Hillary as a demure tourist of no policy significance in
exotic Asia, Bhutto said she had touched essential political chords with whirlwind encouragements for
citizenship groups and small-scale economic development."" (The note contrasting Bhutto corresponds to
a NYT article which Branch quotes in the footer saying, ""she [HRC] played the traditional role of First
Lady as wife and mother..."") [Branch, 246]
> China Speech: Branch outlines how HRC felt the speech needed to be bigger than China and how she
depicted the ""harsh reality everywhere"" from China to Africa. He then cites WJC commenting on the
rave reviews of HRC's speech. [Branch, 289]
➢ Regarding the Russian financial system meltdown, Branch writes ""Yeltsin seemed so removed from
urgent political tasks that both Clintons counseled him directly."" [Branch, 512-513]
Jesse Jackson
Branch writes about Jesse Jackson calling CVC after the Lewinsky story broke and having continued contact
with her throughout the period. WJC thanks him for his support of CVC. This goes into some detail about WJCs
gratitude, but the fact that Jackson ""counseled"" CVC has been public knowledge dating back to at least 1999.
➢ ""But now Jesse had done something he would not forget. When the Lewinsky news broke, he called
Chelsea at Stanford. Jesse was the only nonfamily adult with her cell phone number. How he got it was
another story. Jesse said he knew this was terrible for her. Nothing like it had ever happened in
American politics. He did not know everything involved, but he wanted to remind Chelsea how much
her parents loved her. Their family needed to stick together now above all, and if she needed to counsel,
rage, or pray, he was always available."" [Branch, 497]
Tension with Janet Reno
Throughout the book, from his nomination of her, WJC is portrayed as having no opinion to having a negative
opinion of Janet Reno.
> ""He complained about Janet Reno—made it clear, in fact, that he felt alienated from his own attorney
general. If he removed her, however, the pending decision on yet another special prosecutor [for 1996
campaign finance] would fall to Reno's deputy, Jamie Gorelick, who, Clinton feared, may share Reno's
wholesale devotion to outside control for any case in which the president himself may become a
target...If he removed both Reno and Gorelick, to start fresh, it would touch off a firestorm of protest
like Nixon's Saturday Night Massacre of the Justice Department officials during the Watergate scandal.
That was not an option."" [Branch, 388-389]
> Branch writes about WJC talking about Reno and Louis Freeh disregarding a letter from D'Amato and
continuing to allow independent counsel to go after Ciseneros. The same held true for Mike Espy.
Branch then outlines a meeting between WJC and Reno. Reno had made public statements about her
""desire to stay on the job. 'I told her I didn't like that one damn bit,' the president said tersely. 'I didn't
hire her to work for the New York Times and Washington Post. I hired her to work for me.'"" [Branch,
398] He continues to outline that Clinton did give Reno credit for some good achievements including
coordination with U.S. attorneys and that he didn't blame her for the special prosecutor on Whitewater,
but that ""he did blame her for abdicating responsibility to supervise the investigations ever since, letting
mandates multiply almost at will. She accepted criteria that were ludicrous and crassly partisan. Reno
had failed to defend the presidency itself—not Clinton personally, but the institution—and by extension
the entire executive branch...He told me she had no clue what he meant. His advisers considered her
more naïve than upright, and the fuzziness of the distinction seemed to save her."" [Branch, 399] He cites
that Clinton warned her that she should prepare herself for not staying in the job for the entire second
term.
Portrayal of Jimmy Carter
There are parallels that could be drawn between WJC/BHO and Carter/WJC both in terms of Carter's trip to
North Korea and the mission he went on to Haiti. WJC clearly was frustrated by Carter's seeming desire to be
on the front lines.
North Korea:
➢ ""On North Korea, he [WJC] said Jimmy Carter had initiated his own recent trip with a call to Al Gore,
and Clinton had approved the volunteer mission to break through North Korea's extreme
isolation... Sure enough, Carter did reach North Korean dictator Kim Il-sung, who proposed to allow
inspection of North Korea's nuclear facilities in exchange for relief from the harsh economic sanctions.
The only hitch was that Carter announced the terms on CNN before they became official, adding
gratuitously that he never had agreed with sanctions in the first place. News stories had the White House
seething, but Clinton made light of the spat. He said the deal was since ratified by an exchange of letters,
and he did not believe Carter would criticize official policy 'if the game were still in doubt.' [Branch,
162]
Haiti:
➢ After pushing to be sent to Haiti and enlisting Colin Powell and Sam Nunn to get WJC to break with
Gore (who said Carter shouldn't be trusted a second time) and Christopher and approve the mission to
Haiti to seek a truce with the junta, Carter is portrayed as acting stubbornly and having 'clientitis'
(arguing for acceptance of Haitian generals versus what was in the United States' best interest). He
didn't want to leave and WJC told him he had to. Like after North Korea, Carter again, Carter went to
the press first. ""The three negotiators flew back to Washington late Sunday, and Carter, invited to stay
over at the White House, called CNN's Judy Woodruff after midnight to arrange an interview the next
morning before he reported to Clinton on his mission. This conduct, the president said tersely, was not
right...The press was full of retrospective stories about friction between him and his three prominent
negotiators...He said the current newsweeklies lapped up criticism by Carter as an embarrassment to
Clinton...Many of his advisers griped that Jimmy Carter thought he was still president, but Clinton
found this criticism too jaundiced. Carter had spoken with restraint at their joint press conference, he
allowed, exhibiting a keen political ear...To Clinton, Carter simply felt that he had earned the right to
speak his mind as an international statesman, even about a mission he had accepted for the United States
government complete with an Air Force jet. This sense of entitlement could make Carter a thorn, but
Clinton thought his value far outweighed the political annoyance. He considered Carter a sterling ex-
resident."" [Branch, 200-201]
Dispatch of Bombers Near Iraq
➢ ""He expected military strikes to win bipartisan assent, including former presidents Ford, Reagan and
Bush. 'Dole will support me,' he said. 'Carter will probably criticize me. Carter always criticizes, but he
doesn't have much positive to say."" [Branch, 518]
Gore
For the majority of the book, there is little discussion of WJC and Gore's relationship. There are few places
where he is briefly mentioned and a couple of scenes with some levity. The end, however, describes the
seemingly brutally candid conversation between the two about the 2000 election and the impeachment.
➢ On page 92 Branch writes, ""No, he [Clinton] did not ask Gore to take over a failed foreign policy, as
alleged, but to improve public presentations by his troika of 'bad talkers': shy National Security Adviser
Tony Lake, boring Secretary of State Warren Christopher, and disorganized Defense Secretary Les
Aspin."" [Branch, 92]
➢ In one-passage WJC talks about asking Gore to lead the independent review of Hazel O'Leary and also
having Gore substitute for him at an economic conference in Japan. The latter did not fare well as other
nations were offended that Gore, not WJC attended. Gore insisted that WJC needed to go to Japan to
redeem himself and the administration for his absence. Gore pointed to a few days in January, but WJC
""pronounced them vital to Chelsea's schoolwork. Gore blinked. So what?...Mutual exasperation spiked.
`Al,' Clinton told him, 'I am not going to Japan and leave Chelsea by herself to take these exams.' Gore
erupted. He thought Clinton had lost his bearing. They had a big fight, said the president, and were still
wrangling about dates for Japan."" Branch states that this fight wound up being around the time WJC saw
Lewinsky. [Branch, 316-317]
➢ On page 396-397 there is a scene, which shows Gore's sense of humor and Gore, WJC, et al working as
a team to secure the Cabinet for the second term.
➢ Later there is a passage about an exchange between WJC and HRC about Gore trying to hire a second
criminal lawyer. HRC already knew he was paying the first one $30,000 per month. The conversation is
about a leak of an offer from Jim Neal of TN, the former Watergate prosecutor to defend Gore for free.
The exchange is more on ethics of the offer and its leak to the press than about Gore.
➢ On Gore's announcing his campaign. ""The president had called twice to congratulate Gore for his
kickoff events—once from Geneva, hours later from Paris. Clinton thought the only glitches were
technical... But Gore got all the big things right. His twofold message was perfect: distinguish himself
from Clinton's personal flaws, and tell voters exactly what he would do for them in the White House.
The president said it was fine for Gore to call Clinton's affair with Monica Lewinsky 'inexcusable.'
First, it was true. Second, it showed a necessary strength to criticized the boss. Third, Gore would be
badgered to death until he did. 'Al,' Clinton told him, 'if you thought it would help in the campaign, I
would let you flog me at noon right on the doorstep of the Washington Post.'"" [Branch, 553-554]
Branch continues that WJC told Gore to ignore reporting that he was offended or critical of his
campaign. ""On tape, the president said he confided his chief strategic worry only to Gore himself and to
Gore's pollster, Mark Penn. The vice president must project his platform—where he stood, precisely
how and where he would lead the country—because the Republicans would try to knock him off
substance."" [Branch, 554]
➢ WJC offered critiques of Gore's campaign throughout, but it was always framed as his fear of Gore not
succeeding him. For example, ""Clinton still thought Gore could win. Most people considered him smart,
experience, and motivated. He examined the pitfalls for Gore in a campaign showcasing presidential
character over detailed agendas for the country. Reporters called Gore ""stiff,"" but Clinton discounted
this liability. He thought Gore's droll sense of humor would wear well over time. Gore also was
perceived to be too conventional a Democrat, therefore lacking independence, which called for Gore to
emphasize more his own passion and initiatives. Then the president said Gore could have a brooding
quality about him, not worrisome or off-putting in itself, but potentially damaging if his serious nature
failed to give voters a lifted. Clinton isolated the word ""sunny."" Gore needed more of it."" [Branch, 599]
➢ He also complimented Gore's knowledge of government workings. ""Gore knew Washington. Believe
me, said the president, his administration would have made many more errors in the first two years had
it not been for the vice president."" He then goes on to say that WJC suggested Gore find someone who
would be a bright spot to run with, perhaps Durbin or Bradley or Kerrey, although he also goes into
great detail about the virtues of Mikulski, even though she would never get chosen. How much of this
was WJC's emphasis versus Branch's focus on his home state senator is unclear. [Branch, 599, 618-19]
➢ WJC criticized Gore for not running on the successes of the administration. ""They should be running
essentially for a third term, said the president, but they were afraid the Clinton-Gore record would
tarnish them with Clinton's character."" [Branch, 623] Branch gives WJC's critique of Gore in debate
that had been heard before—that Gore lacked style and a light touch.
➢ Branch has WJC recalling a conversation between WJC and Gore where ""Gore had bared himself in one
of their stressful consultations by insisting that he, Gore, was a good politician, elaborating that he
meant good on the policy, and also good on the politics, but admitted that he did not instinctively blend
the two. Gore said he had to think about it, and Clinton thought this was pretty close to the bone...He
had the stuff to be a great president, and this was the message that Clinton must convey somehow
without seeming to brag on his own record."" [Branch, 623-624]
➢ The big passage about Gore begins on page 641 and extends to 645. Branch notes that WJC was unsure
at first about recording the details. At the outset it says, ""For his own part, Gore was not angry, nor did
he blame Clinton for his defeat, but he wanted to acknowledge forthrightly that some people around him
did."" [Branch, 642] It has WJC acknowledging that Gore's use of him was proper—he was best in the
White House. Then he says, ""'I think you made a mistake not to use me more in the last ten days,'""
Clinton told Gore, 'but otherwise that was not a big deal. I was much more upset about your message,
now that we're being honest.'"" [Branch, 642] Branch recalls WJC saying Gore fought bag saying that
""Clinton's drag plagued every direction."" Clinton then said that Gore was better at governance than
Clinton, and Gore would be better for the nation than Bush, and that he was an ""unparalleled"" vice
president, but that he had ""blind spots."" Branch writes that WJC kept saying their confrontation was
""surreal.""
o Gore had a ""fresh grievance...he wanted Clinton to know that the Buddhist temple fund-raising
scandal had been the worst experience of his life. No one had ever questioned his personal
integrity, but corrosive publicity and whispers had tormented him now for four years. Gore said
he had not been disposed to blame Clinton. However, he remembered telling the president that
he found himself the only English-speaking person at one of those Asian fund-raisers. And the
president was in charge of the party apparatus that was supposed to screen all the donations for
trouble. So he did blame Clinton in a way. The president told me he could scarcely believe the
ensuing tales of suspicion. Gore must still be in shock from the election, or unhinged. 'I thought
he was in Neverland,' he said."" [Branch, 643-644]
o Branch continues: ""The vice president asked Clinton about Monica Lewinsky. He had supported
Clinton all through the impeachment, publicly and privately, while declaring himself
disappointed. Yes, said the president. He appreciated that. However, persisted Gore, Clinton did
not confide any personal feelings. He never explained exactly what happened. There was little to
say, Clinton replied, beyond failure and regret. He was humiliated and angry, had made mistake.
He had misled the American people, and he was sorry. Gore closed his point with emphasis.
Well, he said, this is the first time you have apologized to me personally. Clinton did a double
take...Gore treated the confession as a watershed. Their colliding perspectives made both of
them angry. Clinton exploded that Gore's reaction was phony. What was so significant
here?...Gore exploded back. He was feeling a stubborn repeat of the defensiveness and delayed
honesty that somehow cost the election. Clinton's character was at the root of it..."" [Branch,
644-45]
Other
➢ Maggie as Person Recommending Panetta: Unlike in My Life, in Branch's book, it has WJC asking
Maggie to compile confidential suggestions for McLarty's replacement. ""Williams was shrewd, discreet,
and efficient."" [Branch, 161]
> HRC and Haiti Invasion: Branch asked WJC what HRC thought about his foreign policy team's
suggestion to invade Haiti. ""He said the pell-mell rush to invade was crazy to her. Reacting against the
pressure, the lack of options, and his sense of being trapped, she said he was badly served by his foreign
policy staff. He said she observed with some suspicion that the chief sponsors of the invasion—Lake,
Berger, and Talbott—were the same people who had pushed the ill-fated appointment of Bobby Ray
Inman as defense secretary."" [Branch, 189]
> ITAV: ITAV co-author flap in which Sally Quinn spread rumors that HRC had not written the book.
Quinn said that HRC had denied credit to the book's collaborator, Barbara Feinman, a friend of Quinn.
HRC said Feinman had withdrawn from the project. Branch notes that the White House had draft
chapters in HRC's handwriting. (Branch turned this to be about him and how it affected him as a
ghostwriter.) From this HRC said that Quinn and her friends launched a rumor that HRC and a female
veterinarian of Socks' were ""discovered...in flagrante on a bedroom floor in the White House."" [Branch,
342-343]
> Subpoenas of CVC's Friends: Branch tells of how D'Amato, as Chair of the Banking Committee, had
subpoenaed all those who might have been in the White House when HRC's Rose firm records were
there. This included ""some two dozen of Chelsea's sleepovers."" Senator Sarbanes quashed the
subpoenas for the sleepovers. [Branch, 362]
➢ Vernon Jordan Extramarital Sex: In the context of Lewinsky, Branch says of Vernon Jordan, ""In our
glancing associations, I had picked up from Vernon an attitude toward extramarital sex best described as
lighthearted or recreational."" [Branch, 495]
> Gore/HRC ticket: ""By the numbers, and Clinton's gut, a Gore-Hillary ticket would give Democrats their
best chance to defeat Bush for the White House. 'Hands down,' he [WJC] said, tut I don't think Al
would ever do it.'"" [Branch, 540]
> WJC suggesting Rubin run for NY Senate seat: The passage comes after WJC talks about supporting
HRC if she decided to run, which raises a question of whether he had preferred Rubin or whether the
two events are unconnected. ""When the president had urged him [Rubin] to run for and easily win the
New York Senate seat, Rubin recoiled...He could not fathom why Hillary wanted to run now...""
[Branch, 557]
➢ On trip to South Asia: Branch says that WJC agreed to cancel a stop in Bangladesh, because ""of hard
intelligence that Osama bin Laden had lined the route with assassins."" [Branch, 594] My Life discusses
the cancelled trip but does not specify it was because of bin Laden or assassins.
DI 'Gephardt is an asshole,"" Hillary commented. The president, pointing to my recorders, advised gently that the tapes were on. She
winced but shrugged with a smile. ""Well, he is,"" she insisted. In an awkward silence, I backed up both machines to erase the first
lady's epithet."" [Branch, 263]"
32;FYI below — calling you in 5 minutes
32;fyi
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Thursday, September 10, 2009 5:17 AM
H
Fw: Hormats Hrg
Fyi"
32;Fyi
32;Fyi
32;"ctikoliingtonVo't
NEWS I POLITICS I OPINIONS I BUSINESS I LOCAL I SPORTS I ARTS & LIVING I GOING OUT GUIDE I JOBS I CARS I REAL ESTATE
SHOPPING
Ad•••■•■■•.. • us. kl
Reasonable people can disagree on whatever it was
By Al Kamen
Monday, October 19, 2009
They call it the World's Greatest Deliberative Body (WGDB), Part I.
The Senate Judiciary Committee last week was reviewing an amendment by Sen. Richard Durbin (D-I11.) to the
USA Patriot Act to clarify the legal standard needed for an investigation under the act. The amendment was
intended to provide greater protections from abuse by investigators.
His colleague, Sen. Amy Klobuchar (D-Minn.), spoke in opposition, agreeing with committee Chairman Patrick
Leahy (D-Vt.) and ranking Republican Jeff Sessions (Ala.) that additional protections are not needed.
""I would just point to the actual language in here,"" Klobuchar said, ""which is, it's not like this is some pie-in-
the-sky standard here. I mean, it specifically says,"" she noted approvingly, reading aloud from the bill, that there
have to be ""reasonable grounds to believe that the information sought is relevant to an authorized national
security investigation,"" and you can't investigate someone just for exercising free speech rights and there's got
to be some suspected foreign agent involved.
""So I just, for anyone listening to this, it is not like there is no standard,"" she concluded. ""There is a standard in
place here.""
""That's the standard that is in the bill now?"" Sessions asked.
Klobuchar nodded that it was.
No it's not, Durbin interrupted. ""Senator Klobuchar, you just read my amendment,"" not the bill, he said -- ""and I
think it's critically important that you understand what we're establishing here.""
Whatever. Klobuchar voted against the amendment, which got only a handful of votes anyway.
Blame the gatekeeper
The usual pattern at the State Department is that the new secretary arrives at Foggy Bottom for the first day of
work and enters to rousing cheers from career Foreign Service folks hoping the new boss will actually heed
their expert advice. (They are, by nature, an optimistic crowd.)
Then, after 7 months, 8 days and 12 hours, on average, the grumbling begins that the secretary is ""not
accessible"" to senior career folks, that she's overly protected by her personal staff, that the promised ""open
door"" has slammed shut. The fingers start pointing, usually at the secretary's chief of staff. These days, that's
Cheryl Mills, who holds that post for Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton.
We're hearing complaints even from members of the inner circle that the overworked Mills -- chief of staff,
counselor, overseer of Haiti policy and food security policy and the department motor pool (okay, not really) --
has made entry to Clinton's suite something like penetrating the Green Zone in Baghdad.
Not so, says Undersecretary of State William Burns, the department's top career official. ""This secretary is in
touch every day with as many people across the department as possible, and Cheryl is a big part of making that
happen.""
Another senior State official said Clinton has been on the road a lot: Asia in July and Africa in August and
Ireland and Moscow just the other day, and soon she'll be back on the road, pretty much until Thanksgiving.
There have also been a bunch of meetings of late on AfPak matters.
Hey, just telling you what we're hearing.
In a timely fashion ...
The Loop Better-Late-Than-Never award this year goes to the State Department's personnel bureau. The bureau,
in an Oct. 13 notice, said it had awarded a $1.6 million contract to Campion Services Inc. in West Lafayette,
Ind., to ""assist the department in ensuring that all examinations for Foreign Service [jobs] have been
professionally validated and constitute a reliable means of identifying those applicants with the greatest
possibility of success in the foreign service.""
Well, good thing the department's only been hiring for a couple of hundred years.
The rest of the résumé
The White House last week announced that President Obama had selected Jessie H. Roberson, a nuclear expert
and senior vice president of environmental affairs for the Atlantic Sea Island Group, to be a member of the
Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board. The bio notes her previous jobs, even her undergraduate degree in
nuclear engineering.
Name sounds familiar. Roberson, Roberson: Wasn't she Dubya's appointee as assistant secretary of the Energy
Department for environmental management, the $6 billion-a-year weapons cleanup program? That's not
mentioned in the White House release, but she was there from 2001 to 2004.
Waterboarding for kids?
WGDB, Part II: Sen. Tom Coburn (R-Okla.) must be feeling stressed these days over the travails of his pal, Sen.
John Ensign (R-Nev.). For those who missed it, Coburn took to the Senate floor last week to decry federal
deficits, which are not, for him, an abstraction.
""It is deeply personal with me,"" Coburn explained. ""I have five grandchildren. I look in their eyes, and I see the
potential of their lives and all of these other children who are out there. You know what? We are going to
waterboard them. That is what we are going to do. We are going to waterboard them. We are going to flood
them with debt. We are going to shackle their opportunities. We are going to limit their possibilities because we
don't have the courage to make the difference for their future.""
Wait a minute! It's just a dunk in the water.
© 2009 The Washington Post Company"
32;FYI
32;"I am getting ready to call you shortly re this - jake will give you some background.
Cdm"
32;FYI
32;"FYI — Johnnie flagged this for me.
cdm"
32;I am up - you want me to call you?
32;"Fyi
Sent via BlackBerry by AT&T"
32;fyi
32;Fyi
32;
32;FYI
32;"Millennium Challenge Corporation
THE WHITE HOUSE
Office of the Press Secretary
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
November 6, 2009
President Obama Taps Cassandra Butts to Serve as Senior Advisor at the
Millennium Challenge Corporation
WASHINGTON - Today, President Barack Obama announced that he will name Deputy White
House Counsel Cassandra Q. Butts as Senior Advisor in the Office of the Chief Executive Officer at
the Millennium Challenge Corporation.
President Obama said, ""I am honored to appoint my dear friend and trusted colleague Cassandra to
serve in this important role. The Millennium Challenge Corporation is an essential partner as we
work to combat global poverty, and Cassandra brings a depth of experience and true passion for
justice that will be invaluable to its success in the future. I am grateful for Cassandra's tireless service
in this administration and look forward to continuing to work with her in the years ahead.""
President Obama made the following announcement today:
Cassandra Q. Butts, Senior Advisor, Office of the Chief Executive Officer, Millennium Challenge
Corporation
Cassandra Butts is currently the Deputy White House Counsel where she has focused on judicial
nominations. Ms. Butts was the general counsel to the Obama-Biden Transition Project. She also
served as the Senior Vice President for Domestic Policy at the Center for American Progress. Prior to
joining CAP, she was a senior advisor to House Democratic Leader Richard A. Gephardt (D-MO)
where she worked on refugee, asylum and immigration issues and served as the policy director on
his 2004 presidential campaign. Ms. Butts also served as director of Senator Obama's Senate
transition in 2004-2005. Previously, she was an Assistant Counsel for the NAACP Legal Defense &
Educational Fund and also served as Legislative Counsel to Senator Harris L. Wofford (D-PA). Ms.
Butts was an international election observer to the Zimbabwean parliamentary elections in 2000. She
is a graduate of Harvard Law School and the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
###"
32;
32;fyi
32;K
32;"RELEASE IN PART
B6
FYI"
32;"RELEASE IN PART
B6
fyi"
32;"We're getting ready to get a lot of these — I think not b/c it defeats the purpose of having A/S and others meet and get
to know each other."
32;Not yet.
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Tuesday, November 10, 2009 5:36 PM
H
FW: Congrats on USAID
USAID Administrator Nominee 11'10'09.pdf"
32;Do you still want this night (assuming also af/pak is that day?)
32;-- we need to talk
32;"H RC:
Here is background on the letter from Baucus and the anticipated response prepared by H.
Take a look and see if you want to go in a different direction.
Including the background below so you have the context for the letter."
32;"back -- we need to talk
calling"
32;FYI
32;fyi
32;
32;
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sunday, November 22, 2009 10:44 AM
H
FW:
FYI"
32;Just tried you - went to vox - calling ops
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, November 13, 2009 4:06 PM
H
FW:
RELEASE IN PART
B6
fyi"
32;Let me know when you are up
32;"I met with Steve.
We had a good cony and discussed a number of areas of focus, most of which are WI.
Take a look and flag any concerns.
I am going to discuss with Jack this am.
Cdm"
32;calling
32;FYI — Bill Burns cannot move his meeting.
32;FYI
32;"B1
1.4(D)
See below."
32;Will bring tomorrow
32;fyi
32;Remind me to discuss
32;FYI
32;FYI more — I've spoken to Jim who is addressing but we can catch up about this when we speak.
32;Assume this is something you want to do that we can lock on a date?
32;"Fyi below - ellen and I have been speaking today and I am addressing personally so don't worry and will advise if you
need to step in.
Will call you around 430 or later - whatever works.
Cdm"
32;Calling in 5 min
32;"FYI
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Wednesday, November 25, 2009 11:08 AM
H
FW: FW: Uganda Death Penalty for Homosexual Activity Pending Law"
32;calling you now
32;
32;FYI
32;"Juanes' wife gives birth to son in Miami
Not sure why jim mcgovern wants you to know this but fyi"
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Monday, September 14, 2009 6:51 AM
H
FW: for S
Memo for S on activities.docx
I have comments on this so don't want to accept as final until giving them to her and you.
CUrn"
32;
32;"Will do - taking off from miami now - will call you once we get there around 330pm
XO
Cdm"
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Monday, September 14, 2009 10:51 AM
H
FW: Hitting Bottom in Foggy Bottom
RELEASE IN FULL
FP
FortAgn Policy
Hitting Bottom in Foggy Bottom
The State Department suffers from low morale, bottlenecks, and bureaucratic ineptitude. Do we need to kill it to save it?
BY MATTHEW ARMSTRONG I SEPTEMBER 11, 2009
Discussion over the fate of Foggy Bottom usually focuses on the tenure of Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, the troubles
of public diplomacy, and the rise of special envoys on everything from European pipelines to Afghanistan and Pakistan.
But Americans would benefit more from a reassessment of the core functionality of the U.S. State Department.
Years of neglect and marginalization, as well as a dearth of long-term vision and strategic planning, have left the 19th-
century institution hamstrung with fiefdoms and bureaucratic bottlenecks. The Pentagon now funds and controls a wide
range of foreign-policy and diplomatic priorities -- from development to public diplomacy and beyond. The world has
changed, with everyone from politicians to talking heads to terrorists directly influencing global audiences. The most
pressing issues are stateless: pandemics, recession, terrorism, poverty, proliferation, and conflict. But as report after
report, investigation after investigation, has highlighted, the State Department is broken and paralyzed, unable to
respond to the new 21st-century paradigm.
But how did it get so bad? Is it possible to fix? Or should we just push it over the wall like a great Humpty Dumpty and
reassign the pieces?
There is growing evidence that the internal machinations of the State Department have corrupted its ""core missions"" of
traditional diplomacy and public diplomacy. This year, for example, the Government Accountability Office (gao) found
that the department completely failed in its now four-year-old attempt to reorganize its nonproliferation bureau (a
bureau that remains leaderless). Besides failing to address mission overlap, low morale, and lack of career opportunities,
the failed reorganization caused a significant drop in expertise in offices focused on proliferation issues -- including
""today's threats posted by Iran, North Korea, and Syria,"" the gao's report said -- and coordination with bodies like the
International Atomic Energy Agency.
Another report by the State Department's inspector general this year described severe and broad dysfunction within the
Africa bureau, while ignoring -- perhaps considering it a given -- the lack of departmentwide integration and leadership
in operations. Examples of the dysfunction range from not providing public diplomacy personnel with computers
capable of reading interoffice memos to a failure to effectively work with the new Africa Command.
By necessity, the Defense Department has stepped in where State Department has tuned out: Foggy Bottom relies on
Pentagon funding and even personnel for basic operations central to its mission. For example, the Defense Department
now performs much strategic communications work traditionally the purview of the State Department. In Somalia, for
example, the State Department's budget for public diplomacy is $30,000. The Pentagon's is $600,000. And, in the State
Department's bureaucratic wisdom, the $30,000 does not even belong to its undersecretary for public diplomacy and
public affairs.
Further, rivalries between the different ""cones"" -- or career tracks, referred to by one insider as the ""conal caste system""
-- at the State Department severely impact morale, career growth, and even operations. The report on the Africa bureau
noted that in 2002, public affairs and public diplomacy was a ""failed office"" -- and that the situation is worse in 2009.
Public outreach workers said the bureau's leadership ""does not understand public diplomacy."" The sentiment is
widespread. A 2008 report by a congressional ombudsman, the U.S. Advisory Commission on Public Diplomacy,
described a systemic failure to support and train public diplomacy officers in the field, as well as professional
discrimination against those in the career track.
Attempts to fix the State Department have focused on short-term issues, such as ameliorating its shortages in human
and financial resources. The last eight secretaries of state have attempted to bolster the department by bolstering its
bottom line. No less than Defense Secretary Robert Gates and the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Adm. Mike
Mullen, have long suggested transferring funds from the Defense Department to State Department. But the situation is
so dire that the State Department, at this point, could not even absorb and spend that much-needed infusion of cash. If
there were a wholesale transfer of funds tomorrow, the lack of capacity and skills at the State department would mean
it would have to give it back to the Defenk Department or dole it out to contractors.
The creeping militarization of U.S. foreign policy is itself deeply worrying, not just to Gates and Mullen, but also to such
luminaries as Secretary Clinton and Vice President Joe Biden. In 2008, then-Senator Biden questioned the ""expanding
role of the military in U.S. foreign policy."" He said he was concerned by the ""migration of functions and authorities from
U.S. civilian agencies to the Department of Defense.""
Some commentators have even wondered aloud whether the best way to fix the State Department might be to destroy
it. Foggy Bottom could retain a small core staff for its embassies and ambassadors. All other functions -- such as public
diplomacy, countering misinformation and propaganda, and development, including provincial reconstruction staffing --
could migrate to the Pentagon or become wholly independent agencies.
But atomizing the State Department would ultimately prove dangerous and further the militarization of foreign policy.
The Pentagon needs a counterbalance, a vertically integrated State Department that the president, Congress, and the
U.S. public can count on. Change, rather than creative destruction, is what Foggy Bottom needs.
Envision a State Department capable of leading whole-of-government initiatives with a strategic focus instead of one
hidebound department geared by structure and tradition to execute state-to-state diplomacy. This ""Department of State
and Non-State"" would be as deft at tackling stateless terrorist networks and hurricanes as it would be at fostering and
upholding alliances with foreign ministers. To transform Foggy Bottom in this way will require breaking the rigid
hierarchy, stovepipes, and bottlenecks which make the Pentagon look lean and dynamic in comparison.
Modern global affairs are not compartmentalized by political borders. Besides expanding the overly shallow and narrow
authorities of the public diplomacy bureau, Clinton must restructure the State Department to focus less on countries
and more on regions. Currently, each of Foggy Bottom's regional bureaus, such as Near East Affairs, is configured to
oversee its patch of embassies. Country desk officers, and most ambassadors, report to an assistant secretary, the
regional head. The assistant secretary in turn reports to an undersecretary, who reports to Clinton.
Clinton should name the regional bureau heads, currently assistant secretaries, to undersecretary status. This would
help eliminate an unnecessary bureaucratic layer and would also align the State Department with the Defense
Department (which has powerful regional commands, such as Centcom and Africom). The State Department's regional
leaders would hold an equivalent civilian rank to four-star combatant commanders like Gen. David Petraeus. These
changes would promise to improve communications, synchronize missions, and put the department on the right path for
today's requirements.
But Clinton should beware reforming the State Department too quickly from within -- her efforts could be paralyzed by a
bureaucracy in mutiny that would simply wait her out. U.S. national security would suffer and the Pentagon's growing
power would become more entrenched. Clinton will need the clear and unequivocal support of the president and more
importantly Congress, which authorizes State Department spending bills, to have a chance at success.
In a burst of activity after Barack Obama's election, Congress authorized more money and people for the
State Department and pushed for greater public diplomacy. Still more is required. The question asked over the last eight
years as the State Department abrogated its various responsibilities -- if not Defense, then who? -- will not, indeed
cannot, be answered until the department steps up to the plate and becomes effective and visible in leading and
implementing U.S. foreign policy. This will take time. But, as the saying goes, there is no time like the present. The
United States now has a Congress that supports change, secretaries of state and defense who want change, a president
whose entire election platform was built around the word ""change,"" and an American public that would be outraged at
the dysfunction if it only knew the details.
3"
32;"Cheryl Mills <
Sunday, December 6, 2009 9:39 PM
Fwd: Charles Blow in NYT today
EF1
December 5, 2009
Op-Ed Columnist
Black in the Age of Obama
By CHARLES M. BLOW
A hundred and fifty years ago, Charles Dickens opened ""A Tale of Two Cities"" with the now-famous phrase:
""It was the best of times, it was the worst of times. ...""
Those words resonated with me recently while contemplating the impact of the Obama presidency on blacks in
America. So far, it's been mixed. Blacks are living a tale of two Americas — one of the ascension of the first
black president with the cultural capital that accrues; the other of a collapsing quality of life and amplified racial
tensions, while supporting a president who is loath to even acknowledge their pain, let alone commiserate in it.
Last year, blacks dared to dream anew, envisioning a future in which Obama's election would be the catalyst for
an era of prosperity and more racial harmony. Now that the election's afterglow has nearly faded, the hysteria of
hope is being ground against the hard stone of reality. Things have not gotten better. In many ways, they've
gotten worse.
The recession, for one, has dealt a particularly punishing and uneven hand to blacks.
A May report from the Pew Research Center found that blacks were the most likely to get higher-priced
subprime loans, leading to higher foreclosure rates. In fact, blacks have displaced Hispanics as the group with
the lowest homeownership rates.
According to the most recent jobs data, not only is the unemployment rate for blacks nearly twice that of whites,
the gap in some important demographics has widened rapidly since Obama took office. The unemployment rate
over that time for white college graduates under 24 years old grew by about 20 percent. For their black cohorts,
the rate grew by about twice that much.
And a report published last month by the Department of Agriculture found that in 2008, ""food insecurity"" for
American households had risen to record levels, with black children being the most likely to experience that
food insecurity.
Things on the racial front are just as bad.
We are now inundated with examples of overt racism on a scale to which we are unaccustomed. Any protester
with a racist poster can hijack a news cycle, while a racist image can live forever on the Internet. In fact, racially
offensive images of the first couple are so prolific online that Google now runs an apologetic ad with the results
of image searches of them.
And it's not all words and images; it's actions as well. According to the Federal Bureau of Investigation's 2008
hate crimes data released last week, anti-black hate crimes rose 4 percent from 2007, while the combined hate
crimes against all other racial categories declined 11 percent. If you look at the two-year trend, which would
include Obarna's ascension as a candidate, anti-black hate crimes have risen 8 percent, while those against the
other racial groups have fallen 19 percent.
This has had a sobering effect on blacks. According to a Nov. 9 report from Gallup, last summer 23 percent of
blacks thought that race relations would get a lot better with the election of Obama. Now less than half that
percentage says that things have actually gotten a lot better.
The racial animosity that Obama's election has stirred up may have contributed to a rallying effect among
blacks. According to a Gallup report published on Nov. 24, Obama's approval rating among whites has dropped
to 39 percent, but among blacks it remains above 90 percent.
Also, this hasn't exactly been a good year for black men in the news. Plaxico Burress was locked up for
accidentally shooting off a gun in a club. Henry Louis Gates Jr. was locked up for intentionally shooting off his
mouth at his own home. And Michael Jackson died after being shot full of propofol. Chris Brown brutally beat
Rihanna. Former Representative William Jefferson was convicted. And most recently, the ""personal failings"" of
Tiger Woods portray him as an alley cat. Meanwhile, the most critically acclaimed black movie of the year,
""Precious,"" features a black man who rapes and twice impregnates his own daughter. Rooting for the president
feels like a nice counterbalance.
However, the rallying creates a conundrum for blacks: how to air anxiety without further arming Obama's
enemies. This dilemma has rendered blacks virtually voiceless on some pressing issues at a time when their
voices would have presumably held greater sway.
This means that Obama can get away with doing almost nothing to specifically address issues important to
African-Americans and instead focus on the white voters he's losing in droves. This has not gone unnoticed. In
the Nov. 9 Gallup poll, the number of blacks who felt that Obama would not go far enough in promoting efforts
to aid the black community jumped 60 percent from last summer to now.
The hard truth is that Obama needs white voters more than he needs black ones.
According to my analysis, even if every black person in America had stayed home on Election Day, Obama
would still be president. To a large degree, Obama was elected by white people, some of whom were more able
to accept him because he consciously portrayed himself as racially ambiguous.
In fact, commiserating with the blacks could prove politically problematic.
In a study to be published in the journal Proceedings of the National Academy of the Sciences this month,
researchers asked subjects to rate images of the president to determine which ones best represented his ""true
essence."" In some of the photos, his skin had been lightened. In others, it had been darkened. The result? The
more people identified him with the ""whiter"" images, the more likely they were to have voted for him, and vice
versa.
The Age of Obama, so far at least, seems less about Obama as a black community game-changer than as a
White House gamesman. It's unclear if there will be a positive Obama Effect, but an Obama Backlash is
increasingly apparent. Meanwhile, black people are also living a tale of two actions: grin and bear it.
Forwarded message"
32;"Thank you for your message. I am out of the office today with intermittent access to email.
If you need immediate assistance, please call Joanne Laszczych at 202-647-5548.
Thank you.
cdm"
32;"Great - let's do 730 your time.
XO"
32;
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sunday, January 17, 2010 10:09 AM
H
FW: URGENT: Friends of Haiti Teleconference
Copying you as heads up for your 1pm call only —not for decision.
cdm
From Abedin, Huma
Sent: Sunday, January 17, 2010 10:00 AM
To: Jacobson, Roberta S; S_SpecialAssistants; Valmoro, Lona J; Sullivan, Jacob J; Mills, Cheryl D
Cc: Reynoso, Julissa; Kelly, Craig A; Valenzuela, Arturo A; Gonzalez, Juan S
Subject: Re: URGENT: Friends of Haiti Teleconference
Cheryl needs to address"
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sunday, January 17, 2010 10:56 AM
H
Fw: Rep. Meek is Haiti - details"
32;Fyi - background for call sheet you will get
32;Give me a few minutes
32;"Importance:
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD©state.gov>
Sunday, January 3, 2010 1:53 PM
Abedin, Huma
FW: 2009-12-31 Lewis Work Plan
2009-12-31 Lewis Department Notice.docx; 2009-12-31 Lewis Work Plan.docx
High
HRC:
Per our conversation, she advised I could forward this — it will also come through channels.
cdm"
32;I am meeting with Raj but should be done by llam - can you talk then?
32;"Yes - am forgetting now but a few things - will connect - nothing urgent (I think - damn I am getting old)
B6"
32;fyi
32;fyi
32;FYI
32;FYI
32;fyi
32;fyi
32;FYI
32;FYI
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Saturday, September 26, 2009 9:27 PM
H
Fw: Funeral--oct 6 Texas
Fyi"
32;
32;"Nice feed back on Capricia's Diplomatic Women's Corp lunch with 160 women from around government (WH, agencies,
Hill) and women ambassadors from other countries."
32;More on capricia's lunch yesterday with women from government and women ambassadors from the diplomatic corp
32;Did the call do any good?
32;"FYI below
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Monday, September 28, 2009 10:27 AM
H
Sullivan, Jacob J; Abedin, Huma
FW: Friday Presentation on Urgent Threat - Bill Burns will not be at the Retreat"
32;He indicated he will not be back until Friday night or Saturday am -- are you saying postpone the entire Retreat?
32;"Attached and below is the proposed final Retreat Agenda.
The chief challenge I see is in having each bureau give 3 minutes on their top 3 priorities.
I think it is worthwhile from the standpoint that this is the first time all will be together with the chance to see/meet and
hear from everyone, but it will take time to hear from everyone. I've broken it up into 2 sections of an hour
each. Without these sections, the Retreat would breathe — with them it's tight though I have left padding in each
section.
I also am holding a place for up front for Susan Rice to present if she comes — she has not rsvped.
Please see below and attached and advise if there are other suggested changes.
Bill Burns cannot attend the retreat and currently will give his update on Iran to Jim; we also will have Jim address Iraq in
his overview too.
Cdm
Leadership Learning Retreat
Department of State
Blair House
October 2, 2009
Notional Timeline
8:00am:
8:30am:
8:35am:
Continental Breakfast
Overview and Strategic Objectives for Retreat [CDM]
Foreign Policy in the Obama Administration [HRC]
o Priorities
o Our Accomplishments To Date
8:50am The Next 6 Months
• On the Horizon (including Iraq/Iran) [Jim Steinberg] [10 min]
• The 2011 Budget Challenge [Jack Lew] [10 min]
• QDDR: Restoring Diplomacy/Elevating Dev [10 min]
o Presentation by Anne Marie Slaughter/Alonzo Fulgham
• USUN — The Future and Multilaterism [TBC]
9:25am: Ask the Secretary: Questions and Answers [30 minutes]
10:00am: Urgent Threats Panel
o Middle East — George Mitchell [7 min]
o Af/Pak — Richard Holbrooke [7 min]
o North Korea — Steve Bosworth [7 min]
o Q & A [20 min]
10:45am Coffee Break
11:00am Around the World, Department, and USAID Priorities
• Top 3 Priorities for Each Bureau/Dept — List Style
• 3 minutes each
• [USAID, USUN, SES(Gration), E, PM, ECA, IIP, PA, M, CA, DS, FSI, HR, G,
DRL, OES, PRM, G/TIP]
12:00: Lunch
• Lunch Presentation at 12:20pm
• Presenter: Alec Ross — 21' Century Statecraft [10 min]
1:00pm: Partnering for Success — Paradigms and Pitfalls
• Overview by Maria Otera
• Breakout into 4 Groups of 15 with facilitator and note-taker [40 min]
• Whole of State/USAID/MCC Approach — How Should this Occur
• Partnering and Leading Through the Interagency
• Regional and Functional Bureaus — How Can They Connect
• In-Country USG Coordination — What is the Paradigm?
2:00pm Presentation of Working Group Findings
• Presentation by Group Facilitator (or Other) of Lessons and Best Practices [5 min per
group]
o Whole of State/USAID/MCC
o Partnering and Leading Through the Interagency
o Regional and Functional Bureaus — Ensuring Connections
o In-Country USG Coordination — the Art of the Possible?
• Q/A to each group [25 min]
2:45pm Coffee Break
3:00pm Transnational Challenges:
• Non-Proliferation — Ellen Tauscher [5 min]
3:45pm:
• Climate Change — Todd Stern [5 min]
• Global Health — Dana/Gloria [5 min]
• Global Hunger & Food Security — Moore [5 min]
• Questions and Answers [20 min]
Around the World, Department, and USAID Priorities
• Top 3 Priorities for Each Bureau/Dept — List Style
• 3 Minute presentations
• [AF, EUR, EAP, NEA, SCA, WHA, IO INL, SR/PPP, SR/ME, INR, H, CPR,
OCR, CT, GAG,GWI, .IEC, CRS, WCI]
5:15pm: The Challenges on the Horizon [HRC]
• HRC expresses appreciation for work done today
• Outlines the Challenges Ahead
• Seeks Investment and Commits to Follow-Up
5:30pm Retreat Concludes"
32;"We are headed out now so had gone to bed early.
Will call when we land in miami"
32;
32;"Fyi from Jose re mayor villaraigosa who offered to help raise for shanghai:
""Antonio did say that he has not heard from Secy since election. I wonder how feasible it would be to get her to call him
to thank him for his commitment to help? I think he can easily raise $2m. ""
See b/I
Cdm"
32;fyi
32;"FYI
Forwarded messa e"
32;"I think this is a good idea — what do you think?
cdm"
32;"I think I would want someone higher profile.
If she is doing this, it's likely as a response to incoming rather than as an affirmative agenda.
Not sure how I got to be the person pushing all things in this area -- think from the earlier efforts on family benefits but
as general matter - we have a reactive mechanism right now (to others, to me sending emails re Uganda (and now
Rwanda is doing same kind of anti-gay law)) etc.
This would be someone who's portfolio would be an affirmative agenda.
cdm"
32;FYI
32;Fyi
32;Teeing up you call to preval for today - see b/I
32;Donald payne
32;More
32;I will call him but if I can't reach him I may want you to make a quick call
32;thoughts
32;FYI
32;fyi
32;fyi
32;"We are coordinating with the canadas, the eu and a few others to try to take action on Monday collectively - we'll see
how successful we are"
32;
32;See traffic below — read down
32;"See below - confidential.
Also for WJC."
32;
32;fyi
32;fyi
32;He now works for us
32;See highlight
32;Fyi
32;"B5
- see b/I"
32;Nice
32;Remind me to discuss
32;Fyi
32;Fyi
32;fyi
32;"Importance: High
fyi"
32;"Sorry - been on calls all day re coordination for haiti
How about 8am or 830am sun?"
32;"FYI — Meeting with Melanne and Margaret on Monday.
cdm"
32;fyi
32;You keep asking what she is doing there - I am not sure though I know I had her itinerary b/f she left - will try to find it
32;"Prince
Heads up - will forward more as known"
32;fyi
32;
32;Second update
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Saturday, Janua 30 S S 0 PM
H; cheryl.mills
Re: Have you received email from Bill w letter from Ban yet?
Just came - am sendng my comments to laura later tonight - want to compare it to architecture doc for un-us-goh that
has been subject of multiple calls today"
32;
32;Sorry if sending twice
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sunday, January 31, 2010 12:17 PM
Travel Schedule
CANDIDATES WEEKEND - NEAR FINAL SCHEUDLE_012510.doc
Here was CVC's schedule:
B6"
32;got them - spoke with Jack right bif he you all spoke last night
32;"To rebuild Haiti, start with its young people A 700,000-strong national civic service corps would harness untapped labor
rapidly and instill national pride and confidence.
By Robert Muggah and Robert Maguire
January 31, 2010
Haiti will need big ideas to recover and rebuild in the aftermath of the devastating magnitude 7.0 earthquake this
month. The reported death toll has topped 150,000, and the reconstruction needs are incalculable. How about starting
with a 700,000-strong national civic service corps made up of Haitian youth? There are many reasons why such an entity
makes a lot of sense.
Haiti is a young country. An estimated 70% of the population is under 30; the 15-to-29 segment alone makes up 50% of
the population.
Demographers have long cautioned how excessively youthful populations can potentially exacerbate underdevelopment
and accentuate political instability.
Although Haiti registers among the lowest levels of education in the Western Hemisphere, Haitian youth are a wellspring
of creativity, talent and potential. You don't need to be a community-development specialist to know that they are
stifled by a lack of meaningful opportunities.
Fortunately, Haiti has an enabling environment to set up a civic service corps. Article 52 of the Haitian Constitution
commits citizens to national service, though it has never been activated. What is more, there are many Haitian and
international organizations mobilized and ready to help the government get this going.
A civic service corps would get the young and able out of the tent cities in and around Port-au-Prince and into work.
They could start with the once-iconic center of the capital, but also could begin planting trees, working the fields and
providing services in Haiti's countryside.
At a minimum, this would reverse generations of unfair stigmatizing of the youth there.
This plan would also harness untapped labor rapidly. Before the Jan. 12 earthquake, 50% of youth in their 20s were out
of work. Putting them in service toward rebuilding the capital and outlying areas would be a first step to restoring their
and their country's pride and dignity.
A civic service corps would also multiply international efforts to promote recovery after the world moves on to the next
crisis. Hundreds of humanitarian agencies, donor governments and nongovernmental organizations are facing
monumental challenges in coordinating relief assistance. Although everyone involved is committed to rapid
disbursement, transaction costs are monumental. A civic service corps would allow for a more rapid form of transferring
capital.
Direct support to such a corps would inject serious liquidity into the Haitian economy and stimulate recovery from the
bottom up. Rather than food-for-work schemes, international best practice recommends proposals that promote direct
monetary transfers to beneficiaries. Haitian youth and their families have urgent needs and don't need paternalistic
programs that curb their choices. With proper oversight and financial safeguards, a civic service corps would circumvent
unnecessary administrative costs.
Further, a civic service corps would restore national pride and confidence in Haitian public institutions. During past
decades, the state provided relatively few services to Haitians, particularly outside the capital. In some cases, state
entities were downright predatory. As a result, nonstate providers, including gangs and shady middlemen, filled the gap.
A civic service corps -- wearing the Haitian colors and acting as first responders or organizations demonstrating the
government's presence on the ground -- would show that the government is serious about supporting citizens. It would
be a symbolic first step toward renewing the social contract with the people.
A civic service corps also makes sense for long-term risk and emergency planning. Haiti is situated in the path of
hurricanes and on a fault line, and can expect more disasters. Training 700,000 young people -- especially young women
-- in the basics of first aid, emergency response, community policing and other skills would greatly mitigate the
consequences of future calamities. With disciplined training and management, the corps could provide more intensive
training in specialized areas -- engineering, telecommunications and public health.
An initial step to getting Haiti's youth to work could include the preparation of a road map for future meetings on Haiti,
including the U.N. donor conference scheduled for March. Any final plan would need to draw on the invaluable
experiences of ongoing efforts to mobilize youth in Haiti. These include the work of the Brazilian nongovernmental
organization Viva Rio and its supporters. Before the earthquake, Viva Rio and Brazilian peacekeepers had recruited and
trained hundreds of Haitian youth, including former gang members, to provide relief services in Haiti's slums. This
program could be reactivated and scaled up quickly.
A civic service corps could draw on the lessons from such groups to target and recruit youths for, say, up to two years.
The Haitian government would, of course, need to be the one to manage the undertaking, with direct oversight from the
president's office and the Interior Ministry.
And there are many countries that could provide advice and support.
Nongovernmental groups and private donors could also play a key role in mobilizing support and transferring essential
skills.
Haiti's youth are the future of the nation, and they are central to Haiti's recovery. A civic service corps is a large-scale
way to quickly mobilize them to act as catalyst for long-term, progressive changes.
Robert Muggah, based at the Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies in Geneva, is a principal of
the SecDev Group and is currently advising multilateral and bilateral organizations on Haiti's recovery. Robert Maguire is
on the faculty of Trinity Washington University and chairs the Haiti Working Group of the United States Institute of
Peace in Washington.
Copyright (c) 2010, The Los Angeles Times"
32;
32;
32;"Importance: High
Fyi - we should do handwritten notes to them"
32;Will call you after 630 - just got out of pool w/ kidlets
32;
32;They are doing points per b/I
32;Will call you now
32;Your friend
32;"Rajiv Shah
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Current Under Secretary Rajiv Shah
Rajiv ""Raj"" Shah (born March 9, 1973) is presently Under Secretary of Agriculture for Research, Education,
and Economics (REE) and Chief Scientist at the United States Department of Agriculture.
Prior to his appointment at USDA, Shah worked in a range of leadership roles at the Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation including Director of Agricultural Development, Director of Financial Services, leader of the
Strategic Opportunities initiative and manager of the Foundation's $1.5 billion commitment to the Vaccine
Fund. He also came up with the idea for the International Finance Facility for Immunization to transform the
global system of vaccine financing, and worked to secure donor commitments of more than $5 billion for this
facility. Before joining the Gates Foundation, Shah was a health care policy advisor on the Al Gore presidential
campaign, 2000 and a member of Governor Ed Rendell's (D-PA) transition committee on health.
Shah earned his M.D. from the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine and M.Sc. in Health Economics
at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania. He is a graduate of the University of Michigan and
also attended the London School of Economics.
President Obama announced Shah's selection as Under Secretary of Research, Education, and Economics and
Chief Scientist on April 17, 2009. Shah's nomination was confirmed by the United States Senate by unanimous
consent on May 12, 2009.
Early life and family
Born to Indian immigrant parents who settled in Ann Arbor, Michigan in the late 60's, Raj Shah grew up in the
Detroit area and attended Wylie Groves High School.
He lives with his wife, Shivam, and their two young children, Sajan and Amna. He has one sister, Ami Shah,
who is a medical doctor.
Career
Raj Shah is currently the Under Secretary of Research, Education and Economics (REE) and Chief Scientist at
the U.S. Department of Agriculture. The REE mission area provides the science that federal agencies, policy
makers, researchers, and others draw on to meet challenges facing America's food and agriculture system. The
four REE agencies are the Agricultural Research Service (including the National Agricultural Library), the
Economic Research Service, the National Agricultural Statistics Service, and the Cooperative State Research,
Education and Extension Service.
Prior to his appointment at USDA Raj worked in a range of leadership roles at the Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation to help the poorest people on earth lead healthy and productive lives.
As the Director of the Agricultural Development program, Shah oversaw the foundation's multi-billion dollar
portfolio of grant and program-related investments to help transform rural economies throughout the developing
world and help small farmers and their families overcome hunger and poverty. He led efforts to create the
Alliancefor a Green Revolution in Africa, helped recruit its leadership including UN Secretary General Kofi
Annan, and serves on its Board of Directors. He oversaw grant portfolios in science and technology; farmer
productivity; market access; and policy, statistics and advocacy; and managed a team of more than 60
professionals. He also developed innovative partnerships with private industry, the United Nations, the World
Bank, and country governments around the world, where he was an active voice on issues related to food and
hunger.
As the Foundation's first Director for the Financial Services to the Poor portfolio, Shah worked with a broad
range of financial institutions and other donors to determine how Foundation resources could best amplify the
field's collective impact. Previously, he led the Strategic Opportunities initiative which worked with Foundation
co-chairs to identify, assess and recommend new areas of giving. This process led to the creation of the
Foundation's Global Development Program.
Shah's early work with the Foundation focused on global health. As Deputy Director for Policy and Finance,
Raj managed the Foundation's $1.5 billion commitment to the Vaccine Fund — an effort referred to by Bill and
Melinda Gates as their best investment. He also came up with the idea for the International Finance Facility for
Immunization to transform the global system of vaccine financing and worked to secure donor commitments of
more than $5 billion for this facility. The World Health Organization estimates this initiative will save more
than five million children's lives through the next decade, and a New York Times article described the effort as
""a clever way to reduce the burden of costly diseases now and save money in the future.""
Shah previously worked as a health care policy advisor on the Gore 2000 presidential campaign, was an active
supporter of the Barack Obama presidential campaign, 2008, and served as a member of Pennsylvania Governor
Ed Rendell's health transition committee. He also co-founded Health Systems Analytics (a health care
consulting firm), served as an advisor to the City of Philadelphia's Public Health Commissioner, and worked at
the World Health Organization. In addition, he co-founded multiple nonprofit organizations focused on
increasing the political awareness and civic engagement of minority communities, including Project Impact for
South Asian Americans."
32;"Lael Brainard
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Lad Brainard was a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution from 2001 to 2009, and served as the vice
president and director of the Global Economy and Development program from June 2006 to March 16, 2009.
Brainard has been nominated by President Barack Obama to be Under Secretary of the Treasury for
International Affairs.al
Brainard served as Deputy National Economic Adviser and Chair of the Deputy Secretaries Committee on
International Economics during the Clinton Administration. As Deputy Director of the National Economic
Council, she helped build a new White House organization to address global economic challenges such as the
Asian financial crisis and China's WTO entry. As the US Sherpa to the G8, she helped shape the 2000 G8
Development Summit that for the first time included leaders of the poorest nations and laid the foundations for
the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, TB, and Malaria. She has been mentioned as a likely U.S. Trade Representative
in the Obama administration. 121
Previously, Brainard served as Associate Professor of Applied Economics at the MIT Sloan School of
Management, where her publications made important contributions on the relationship between offshore
production, trade, and jobs; the measurement of structural and cyclical unemployment in the US economy; and
strategic trade policy. Brainard has also worked at McKinsey & Co. advising corporate clients on strategic
challenges and on microenterprise in West Africa.
Brainard is an alumna of the George School class of 1979, a boarding school in Newtown, PA. Brainard
received masters and doctoral degrees in Economics from Harvard University, where she was a National
Science Foundation Fellow. She graduated with highest honors from Wesleyan University with a degree from
the College of Social Studies. She is the recipient of a White House Fellowship and a Council on Foreign
Relations International Affairs Fellowship, a Marshall Scholar elect, and a member of the Wesleyan University
Board of Trustees, Council on Foreign Relations, and Aspen Strategy Group.
Publications
Brainard is co-editor of Too Poor For Peace? (2007); co-editor of Offshoring White Collar Work (2006); editor
of Transforming the Development Landscape: the Role of the Private Sector (2006) and Security by Other
Means: Foreign Assistance, Global Poverty and American Leadership (2006); and coauthor of The Other War:
Global Poverty and the Millennium Challenge Corporation (2004). On March 23, 2009 she was nominated as
Under-Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs by President Barack Obama.
Select recent publications include ""Services Offshoring, American Jobs, and the Global Economy,"" with Robert
E. Litan, Perspectives on Work (Winter 2005); ""Reassessing National Security,"" with Michael O'Hanlon, in
Alice Rivlin and Isabel Sawhill, eds., Restoring Fiscal Sanity (2004); ""Building Common Ground on Trade
Demands More Than a Name Change,"" with Hal Shapiro, The George Washington International Law Review,
2003; ""Compassionate Conservatism Confronts Global Poverty,"" The Washington Quarterly, Spring 2003;
""The Implications for the Global Economy of America's Campaign against Terrorism,"" Cambridge Review of
International Affairs, July 2002; and ""Are U.S. Multinationals Exporting U.S. Jobs?"" with David Riker, in
David Greenaway and Douglas Nelson, eds., Globalization and Labour Markets (Elgar, 2001).
Brainard is married to Kurt Campbell, who was nominated in April as assistant secretary of state for East Asian
and Pacific affairs.121"
32;Calling you in a bit before I leave the office.
32;"RELEASE IN
PART B6"
32;
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sunday, October 25, 2009 12:11 PM
RE: More When We Speak"
32;Fyi and happy christmas
32;"Goosby if the Newsweek report is accurate, who looks the other way as Uganda enacts a
draconian law to imprison or even execute its LGBT citizens.
Fyi
Sent via BlackBerry by AT&T"
32;Fyi
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, December 25, 2009 10:41 PM
H
Re: Happy Holidays!
Cdm"
32;Yes - calling now.
32;fyi
32;"Fyi for you - jack and I discussed approach.
Cdm"
32;Per request b/I
32;
32;"RELEASE IN PART
B6"
32;Will call at six - still doing email
32;"I am sure you saw but can't resist sending ...
Yellow highlights are mine
cdm"
32;
32;fyi
32;FYI
32;See final b/I -
32;This is the close to final that will go in Posner's rather than your name.
32;"B6
Call me on"
32;
32;Y
32;"H RC:
This is an early preview of the speech (which is still in progress).
Let me know what you think conceptually after you read.
Cdm
VETTERS: PLEASE INITIAL HERE"
32;"HRC:
Attached and below is the concept for a technology dinner that would lead up to speech.
Concept Paper for Dinner on Connection Technologies
Potential Invitees:
1) Padmasree Warrior, CISCO
2) Carol Bartz, Yahoo!
3) John Thompson, Symantec
4) Pierre Omidayr, Ebay and Omidyar Networks
5) Anthony Jiminez, MicroTech
6) Luis Ubinas, Ford Foundation
7) Julius Genachowski, Chairman FCC
8) Craig Mundie or Steve Ballmer, Microsoft
9) Steve Jobs, Apple
10) Michael Joseph, Safaricom and M-Pesa
11) Ory Okolloh, Ushahidi
12) Jack Dorsey, Twitter/Square
13) Eric Schmidt, Google
14) James Eberhard, Mobile Accord
15) Jason Liebman, Howcast
16) Carlos Slim, MexTel or Mo Ibrahim, former CelTel and now Mo Ibrahim
Foundation
17) Clay Shirky, NYU
18) Andrew Rasiej, TechPresident
19) Jonathan Zittrain, Harvard"
32;"French.docx; Final Communique Portuguese.docx;
FinalCommuniqueCreole_Revision.docx
Fyi"
32;Good - you good for us to sign off on giving a speech on 21 jan at newseum?
32;Apparently - will find out what.
32;
32;FYI — for you in your new tech role.
32;
32;"B6
FYI"
32;Fyi
32;Fyi
32;fyi
32;Fyi
32;Fyi
32;"I will be traveling today, February 11, returning late Sunday, February 14, with intermittent access to my email. If you
need to reach me urgently please contact Nora Toiv, Toivnf@state.gov, 202-647-8633 or Joanne Laszczych,
laszczychj@state.gov, 202-647-5548.
Thank you!"
32;"I have been working harrd - ertharin has been running my ass around. We starting our meetings at 930am after landing
at 830am and we are now just getting down with her dinner party for 40 for Haiti (with ag minister and haiti ambo).
Wouldn't you know it - it snowed for the first time in decades in Rome.
Conf went well - am now hoping tomorrow to shop!
Thank you for the well wishes.
Safe travels."
32;
32;Fyi
32;See traffic WI
32;See VI - perhaps was prescient - see VI
32;"I didn't know that to be the case.
Not sure if we can get the research b/f you speak but will try"
32;"FYI
B6"
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, February 19, 2010 4:05 PM
FW: Haiti Conference Call.
FYI
We are including them as a representative of the EU and asking them to 1.4(D)
B1
cdm"
32;"I will be traveling today, February 19, with intermittent access to my email. If you need to reach me urgently please
contact Nora Toiv, Toivnf@state.gov, 202-647-8633 or Joanne Laszczych, laszczychj@state.gov, 202-647-5548.
Thank you!"
32;fyi
32;
32;
32;Yes - will be in offc for part of afternoon so will send you time while you are in church.
32;
32;great
32;
32;FYI
32;Assume you know about this?
32;"Fyi below
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD©state.gov>
Tuesday, February 23, 2010 7:38 AM
FW: Rio Group-Haiti
Declassify on: 02/23/2020"
32;Fyi
32;Fyi
32;fyi
32;
32;"She is staying a few more weeks b/c it lets her retire.
Lona already has been at work per an earlier email from me I forgot on a party for her and picked a date that works for
you and her."
32;fyi
32;"I am traveling outside of the country, with intermittent access to my email. If you need to reach me urgently please
contact Nora Toiv, Toivnf@state.gov, 202-647-8633 or Joanne Laszczych, laszczychj@state.gov, 202-647-5548.
Thank you
cdm"
32;What is mullen's first name?
32;Calling you
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, February 5, 2010 8:24 AM
H
Fw:
There may be hope ... See traffic"
32;"I just spent an extra hour explaining the architecture of the IHRC/HDA.
They had misconstrued it to be something that wjc now could not do b/c of his new un role.
We can discuss.
Will fill wjc in on the plane.
I hear it's snowing - won't likely make it back to dc until sun or mon"
32;You are s000 lucky!!!
32;"ANGOLANS TO VOTE IN 2012, PRESIDENT MAY EXTEND TERM(SBU) Constitutional revisions signed by President dos
Santos abolish direct presidential elections and would allow dos Santos to remain in power until 2022, according to
press. The Angola desk comments the move is a step backwards for democratic reform, and adds the changes shuffle
the government, keeping Foreign Minister dos Anjos in office but removing Defense Minister Paihama. (Ops/Angola
desk telcon, Reuters"
32;
32;"RELEASE
IN PART
B6"
32;
32;"POLITICS d,.dby MARC AMBINDER
« The Sunday Shows In Five Bullet Points I Main
Nov 29 2009, 9:13 pm by Marc Ambinder
A Last-Minute Meeting On Afghanistan
President Obama convened a last-minute meeting of his national security team tonight to discuss the language that his
administration will use to describe its new strategy for Afghanistan. Two administration sources confirmed that the
meeting, which began at 5:oo pm, included cabinet officials like Defense Secretary Robert Gates. The officials would not
describe the meeting and said that no other news organizations were being given any background briefing. That suggests
that the meeting was akin to a pre-game rally session by the commander-in-chief: he wants to gert everyone from Gates to
Gen. Stanley McChrystal to Secretary of State Hillary Clinton on the same page before the president's Tuesday speech.
Before young officers at West Point, Obama will announce his decision about Afghanistan to an increasingly skeptical
nation and a Democratic Congress that is threatening to condition its budgeting on identifiable off-ramps and
timeframes. Obama is expected to announce that he'll order several Army combat brigades to Afghanistan -- about
30,00o troops in all, most of them to be tasked with more rapidly standing up Afghanistan's indigenous army. His speech,
as described in broad terms by advisers last week, will be short and serious. His challenge is to persuade Americans that
the war in Afghanistan is winnable, as Americans tend to give their presidents significant leeway so long as they believe
that the president is confident in his strategy. Officials said last week that while would outline a clear exit strategy, he
would not tie troop withdrawals to any specific political developments in Afghanistan, which might run into opposition
from Democrats in Congress, who are demanding benchmarks. Nor is the President likely to impose direct conditions on
Afghanistan President Hamid Karzai. An official said that Obama plans to try explain the interconnection between the the
stability of Pakistan and the nexus of terror in Afghanistan. An explanation that the American people would accept has
proven elusive.
Permalink :: Comments (0) TrackBacks (0) :: Share"
32;FYI
32;"fyi
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Tuesday, January 5, 2010 9:13 PM
FW: Daniel Yohannes
B6"
32;"It took 19 hours but I got home at noon today.
I can talk at 830pm tonight if that works for you? I cam also do tomorrow am.
Cdm"
32;How about 830am?
32;Getting on a 9:30pm call - can I call you after?
32;
32;fyi
32;Fyi
32;fyi
32;Fyi
32;"HRC:
Huma reminded me that you wanted to get a more structured agenda for your weeklies with Susan. I will work on that
over the next few weeks.
For tomorrow, Erica anticipates she will likely want to discuss the following items:
In addition to what Jake may add, think you should raise:"
32;"Fyi
B6
_"
32;FYI
32;"All good — have communicated some matters to Jake.
RS on board. Will have you call TV when you ret on Weds and can explain when we talk.
Sexton and Marty Edelman will be in UAE as fyi — will tell Huma."
32;fyi
32;See below
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, October 30, 2009 8:47 PM
H
RE: Your boss
Look at you getting big praise — I don't even get that!"
32;Fyi
32;"For WJC too.
Good meetings.
Spent about 3.5 hours w/ preval and bellerive.
They are very much on board w/ ihrc/hda and had some comments we can discuss when we talk.
Same on mdtf.
Discussed the political situation and the options they are looking at - quite thorny, particularly in terms of what to do re
constitutional legitmacy.
He's on board w/ a visit on 10 mar w/ dinner w/ you and wjc on 9 mar.
More when we talk - taking off now.
Cdm"
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Monday, January 18, 2010 2:26 PM
H; Doug Band; Justin Cooper; cheryl.mills
Mills, Cheryl D
Re: Glad you're there
Diane Reynolds; MMezvinsky
Just leaving the hospital.
Really rough and sad.
Mark Paul and others doing the Lord plus 10 work
I sent Keen an email re no security.
Troops just arrived so the hopefully they will be able to keepb doctors there tonight around the clock.
Cdm
Sent: Mon Jan 18 14:22:08 2010
Subject: Glad you're there
PI give me periodic updates about what you're seeing and doing. Love to all."
32;
32;Not sure why these came back - scroll down for messages
32;Scroll down
32;Fyi
32;
32;I actually think it makes sense and may help - so I am happy to nnawigate it for him
32;FYI
32;"This is the role we discussed
cdm"
32;"Haiti that you asked for
Read all the way down (2 emails)
Cdm"
32;"Importance: High
FYI"
32;All you - will get with lona
32;"Record
See below"
32;fyl
32;"FYI:
Jan 12, 2010
» Mobile Home » Top Stories
Inside the Reid eruption
By Mike Allen & Glenn Thrush I 1/12/10 @ 12:19 AM EST
Harry Reid isn't talkative. But the Senate majority leader chatted freely with the two disarmingly charming book authors
who came to his office at the Capitol shortly after the 2008 election.
They — and their tape recorder — were soaking in his reminiscences about the wild campaign that had turned a
backbencher in his caucus into president of the United States.
Reid wasn't on guard — perhaps because he'd been told by his staff that the meeting would be ""off the record,""
according to a person with knowledge of the exchange.
Although Reid is a master of the Senate's mysterious inside game, he's often botched the outside game because of what
one colleague calls a ""penchant for saying things without a filter.""
But Jim Manley, Reid's senior communications adviser, wasn't too worried as he and his boss sat down with John
Heilemann of New York Magazine and Mark Halperin of Time magazine — two veteran reporters who were working on
what their publisher had billed as ""a sweeping, novelistic, and ultimately definitive portrait"" of the 2008 race.
Like virtually every Washington political insider, Manley had a long and warm relationship with Halperin, the longtime
political director for ABC News who once set conventional wisdom in Washington with ""The Note.""
Maybe Reid and Manley — thinking back to their many candid exchanges over the years — simply assumed that
Halperin wouldn't burn him or his boss. Or maybe he expected that Halperin would check back with him on any quotes
he planned to use?
Whatever they were thinking, they were wrong.
Reid was talking about the reasons why, even though he had publicly professed neutrality in the vicious Democratic
primaries of 2008, he had secretly encouraged then-Illinois Sen. Barack Obama to challenge another member of his
caucus, then-New York Sen. Hillary Clinton. And amid all the talk of Obama's oratorical gifts, he let slip something else:
Obama could win the White House because he was a ""light-skinned"" African-American ""with no Negro dialect, unless he
wanted to have one.""
The authors write in ""Game Change,"" published this weekend, that Reid had made the remark ""privately."" They did not
say he had said it to them.
As a chagrined Reid telephoned political allies in the Senate and civil rights community to shore up his support this
weekend, he made it clear that he felt burned by the authors.
In the book's""Authors' Note,"" they wrote: ""All of our interviews — from those with junior staffers to those with the
candidates themselves — were conducted on a 'deep background' basis, which means we agreed not to identify the
subjects as sources in any way. We believed this was essential to eliciting the level of candor on which a book of this sort
depends.""
Heilemann said on MSNBC's ""Morning Joe"": ""We had a very clear agreement with all those sources that our interviews
would be on deep background.... Our ground rules are ... that we won't identify any of our sources as the sources of the
material. But we said to them all very clearly that if they put themselves in scenes of the book, if they were uttering
dialogue to people in the book in part of a scene, that we would identify them as the utterer of those words.""
Halperin added: ""There's no one we talked to for the book who we burned in any way, or violated any agreement with.""
Manley, a Capitol Hill veteran who also had worked for the late Sen. Ted Kennedy, had been responsible for monitoring
the interview and dealing with issues arising from it.
But he didn't tell anyone else in Reid's inner circle about the inflammatory remarks their boss had made; because of his
good relationship with the authors, he assumed that the quotes would never be made public — at least not without his
knowing about it first.
Manley declined comment on this story-- and wouldn't confirm if the interview took place.
On Friday at 10 p.m. — half a year after the interview — The Atlantic's Marc Ambinder e-mailed Reid's staff with
questions about a ""light-skinned"" candidate without a ""Negro dialect.""
In the second-guessing that followed, Capitol Hill veterans said there was no way that such inflammatory words from a
Senate majority leader would remain off the record, even if that had been the arrangement.
But because Manley had not sounded an internal alarm, he and the rest of the damage-control squad were caught flat-
footed by Ambinder's e-mail, several people close to the situation told POLITICO.
""They could have had weeks to prepare for this or to try to convince Halperin not to run it,"" said a Democrat who
participated in some of the damage control.
Now the staff had been blindsided with a revelation that, if mishandled, could be politically fatal. Manley and other
aides worked until 2 a.m. Saturday to draft Reid's carefully written apology, which emphasized his record on African-
American issues.
""I deeply regret using such a poor choice of words,"" the 90-word statement began.
Later on Saturday, Manley helped lead a counteroffensive, calling White House press secretary Robert Gibbs, a friend
from his days as communications director of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, to set up an apology call
between Reid, at home in Searchlight, Nev., and Obama back in Washington.
In a stunning ""Statement by the President"" e-mailed to reporters at 3:55 p.m. Saturday, Obama said: ""Harry Reid called
me today and apologized for an unfortunate comment reported today.... As far as I'm concerned, the book is closed.""
Relieved to have the president's solid backing, Reid's aides decided that their toughest challenge would be to prevent
any prominent African-American Democrats from attacking Reid too harshly — or calling for his resignation.
Reid's team correctly anticipated that Republicans would demand his head. Keeping that criticism from becoming a
bipartisan drumbeat was the key. The team calculated that as long as the attacks looked like partisan shouting, Reid
would benefit.
Aides say their boss quickly understood the danger and spent much of Saturday working a call list of about 30 prominent
African-Americans across the country. On the calls, he apologized for his words and argued that the book's main
takeaway should be that he had quietly supported Obama over Clinton, long before those made his feelings public.
Among those he called were the Rev. Al Sharpton; longtime civil rights leader Julian Bond; Rep. Barbara Lee (D-Calif.),
chairwoman of the Congressional Black Caucus; political consultant and talk-show fixture Donna Brazile; House Majority
Whip Jim Clyburn (D-S.C.); Wade Henderson, CEO of the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights; and Hilary Shelton,
director of the NAACP's Washington office.
The extent of the damage to his already shaky reelection chances in Nevada won't be known until November. But by
Monday, Reid believed the Washington storm was passing. From his home in New York, Sen. Chuck Schumer telephoned
Reid in Nevada and offered to organize a letter of support from all the Democratic senators.
Reid decided that was unnecessary. He had confidently concluded that for now, at least, he had won the inside game."
32;"Latest below
We did a series of interagency calls from 7pm - 11pm.
Raj going out on am shows - potus will announce him as point for coordinating our disaster assistance.
We will start search and rescues teams at sunlight (w/no heavy equipment getting folks out will be hard).
We have requests for hel from Irish, canadian tai
David lindewall is doing good job.
See b/1.
Cdm"
32;Fyi
32;"Importance:
FYI
High"
32;FYI
32;"FYI
We have not announced the amount raised."
32;FYI
32;
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Wednesday, January 13, 2010 4:10 PM
FW: Good Job!
fyi"
32;
32;fyi
32;
32;"FYI - see Michele message
Forwarded message"
32;FYI
32;
32;FYI — I will limit Haiti emails to major fyi information for you.
32;"INTERNATIONAL COORDINATION
• (U) Colombian President Uribe intends to travel to Haiti January 17, according to press. His government
will also send a naval hospital ship. (Rendon News Alerts)"
32;"Salvation Army)on NPR saying he is upset because they are running out of supplies and
he keeps being told they are in the air.
Yes
While we have control of airport — the Haitians are dictating the priority of landing of planes and the document did not
get signed today b/c at meeting the issue did not get resolved (or medical supply issue).
On with Ken now — getting ready to try calling Preval with Ken"
32;FYI
32;"REPUBLIC, AND ON THEIR WAY HOME
Importance:
Love th cg"
32;FY/
32;"Importance: High
FYI Below.
FYI — I spoke to Lady Catherine Ashton who called to 1) wish you well on this trip and express her gratefulness that you
are traveling; and 2) ask if you might be willing to call her Sunday morning to give her a read out of your trip b/c she has
a briefing in Brussels and having a first hand report from you will allow her to forestall a trip to Haiti in the next week.
cdm"
32;I think she may do an earlier call
32;B6
32;
32;Not sure who they were but fine to do 1pm - I'll make sure it works.
32;Take a look — a reminder of the trauma our workers have confronted.
32;"We are setting you up to meet with UN tomorrow - it will be Mulet (he is ne Heda Anabi) and we also will have UN
General - Floriana Peixoto, and we'll bring Keen and Luck (or Callahan) to the meeting."
32;"I will be traveling today without access to my email. If you need to reach me urgently please contact Nora Toiv.
Toivnf@state.gov o
Thank you!"
32;"I am traveling overseas and only have sporadic access to my email. If you need immediate assistance, please call State
Department Operations at 202-647-1512 and ask for Nora Toiv who can assist you.
cdm"
32;"rshah
RELEASE IN PART
B5,B6"
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, March 5, 2010 4:37 PM
FYI WJC"
32;See original email PA
32;"For hrc and wjc
of Little Rock B6"
32;"Trying - they are a bit mad on two proper grounds - will make other donors less likel to give and our congress less likely
to give"
32;Agree - did you reach FM cannon
32;"Busy day yesterday - highlights:
-haiti delivered its vision, fine but needs work and cost alignment (3 year cost exceeds 78 with total need put at 11B for
complete rebuild - neither are great numbers based on analysis so work cont)
- discussion and presentation of both dev authority and MDTF (which is open for contributions now and will be
administered by WB with support from IDB)
- bellerive or preval to announce wjc in context of release on dev authority - supposedly today but if preval wants to
announce from Haiti that won't occur until thurs and will drive us all wild so pushing for today
-EC says it will do essentially 100M that is new (rest is 200M being repurposed; 100M - of which 20M is only new - being
repurposed). Of their repurposed money, 40M euros will go to debt support by end of april)
- France will do 70M euros a year for 2 years (upping their traditional annual contrib by SOM euros from 20M euros);
french will do some budget supp
- seeing spain, canada, and pot today
-tentatively seeing cubans today to discuss hospital cooperation proposal they sent as result of craighulissa last trip
-lots of whispering re timing of usg human rts report and a few pointed ques re our motivation on timing given pre-conf
and cont on 31Mar; preval still very upset - will be calling him on thurs as a post conf cony and hear him out
- pressure for budget support on everyone; french pointed out US says it doesnt do budget supp but sends 500M each
year to palestian auth in direct budget support suggesting we will do it when politically expedient for us
- worry about the rains and cont need for shelter (been raining in PauP for last 3 days).
Cdm"
32;XO
32;"Nice work Jake and Nora.
cdm"
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD©state.gov>
Thursday, April 1, 2010 3:37 PM
Mills, Cheryl D
Fw: THANKS to Team Pledge Data
See bottom of message re the firsts.
These were innovations we pushed (particularly use of web for real time display of pledges and what initially was
described by those who did not like my idea as pay to play (or in this instance as I argued - it was pay to have a priority
speaking slot as those who did not have a pledge would get to speak, just not until the end).
Nice addition to our innovation and tech storyline.
Cdm"
32;More on tech component
32;
32;Yep
32;FYI
32;
32;FYI
32;Didn't rec name - will get
32;Here he is.
32;Fyi traffic
32;From Lee b/I
32;B/w noon and 1pm sun; also may call in one of windows today
32;Fyi
32;">; Casper de Villiers
>; eiman.zein-elabdin
; katiestanton
p, Rene Simons
<sawsanhassan1
RELEASE IN PART
B6"
32;"RELEASE IN FULL
See below — thoughts."
32;To dc from ny at 9am so will call later - what works?
32;Fyi
32;"I am likely going to go to bed early and be up early.
Hope you had a chance to go through ppt.
cdm"
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, April 16, 2010 4:57 AM
Fw: Press Release: Chairman Eliot Engel Praises Energy and Climate Partnership of the
Americas
Fyi"
32;FYI
32;"See his last point.
cdm
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Saturday, April 17, 2010 3:48 PM
FW: Haiti
— Reason: 1.4(D) — Declassify on: 04/17/2025"
32;Fyi
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Saturday, April 17, 2010 6:24 PM
Re: Haiti
They are on board philosophically but don't know how much he would say vis-a-vis Raj"
32;"For this year:
Chile is going to Alex Wolfe
Columbia to Mike McKinley
Venezuela to Larry Palmer.
Next year, few big posts are up. Indeed the only posts are:
Cuba, Ecuador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, panama, paraguay"
32;
32;"Fyi traffic
Mills, Cheryl D
Monday, April
FW: Sanctions
<MillsCD©state.gov>
19, 2010 4:20 PM
and Transitions"
32;"request for Haiti, Lugar says
FYI"
32;"Napolitano and Secretary of State Clinton
fyi"
32;"Lissa and I met at the end of last week.
She had worked through a number of candidates.
She had narrowed to 3: (but see below); ; and She was continuing her B6
outreach.
Her email below is the latest update.
She has agreed not to depart even on 1 June if we have not yet settled and brought someone on board but I think we
are on track to do interviews the next two weeks and then give sample writings and opportunities to decide in sufficient
time.
Her update below is fyi to you."
32;"FYI
Kristof's OpEd From Today's NY Times.
April 22, 2010
Op-Ed Columnist
Obama Backs Down on Sudan
By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF
JUBA, Sudan
Until he reached the White House, Barack Obama repeatedly insisted that the United States apply more pressure on
Sudan so as to avoid a humanitarian catastrophe in Darfur and elsewhere.
Yet, as president, Mr. Obama and his aides have caved, leaving Sudan gloating at American weakness. Western
monitors, Sudanese journalists and local civil society groups have all found this month's Sudanese elections to be deeply
flawed - yet Mr. Obama's special envoy for Sudan, Maj. Gen. Scott Gration, pre-emptively defended the elections, saying
they would be ""as free and as fair as possible."" The White House showed only a hint more backbone with a hurried
reference this week to ""an essential step"" with ""serious irregularities.""
President Omar Hassan al-Bashir of Sudan - the man wanted by the International Criminal Court for crimes against
humanity in Darfur - has been celebrating. His regime calls itself the National Congress Party, or N.C.P., and he was
quoted in Sudan as telling a rally in the Blue Nile region: ""Even America is becoming an N.C.P. member. No one is against
our will.""
Memo to Mr. Obama: When a man who has been charged with crimes against humanity tells the world that America is
in his pocket, it's time to review your policy.
Perhaps the Obama administration caved because it considers a flawed election better than no election. That's a
reasonable view, one I share. It's conceivable that Mr. Bashir could have won a quasi-fair election - oil revenues have
manifestly raised the standard of living in parts of Sudan - and the campaigning did create space for sharp criticism of
the government.
It's also true that Sudan has been behaving better in some respects.
The death toll in Darfur is hugely reduced, and the government is negotiating with rebel groups there. The Sudanese
government gave me a visa and travel permits to Darfur, allowing me to travel legally and freely.
The real game isn't, in fact, Darfur or the elections but the maneuvering for a possible new civil war. The last north-south
civil war in Sudan ended with a fragile peace in 2005, after some two million deaths. The peace agreement provided for
a referendum, scheduled to take place in January, in which southern Sudanese will decide whether to secede. They are
expected to vote overwhelmingly to form a separate country.
Then the question becomes: will the north allow South Sudan to separate? The south holds the great majority of the
country's oil, and it's difficult to see President Bashir allowing oil fields to walk away.
""If the result of the referendum is independence, there is going to be war - complete war,"" predicts Mudawi Ibrahim
Adam, one of Sudan's most outspoken human rights advocates. He cautions that America's willingness to turn a blind
eye to election-rigging here increases the risk that Mr. Bashir will feel that he can get away with war.
""They're very naïve in Washington,"" Mr. Mudawi said. ""They don't understand what is going on.""
On the other hand, a senior Sudanese government official, Ghazi Salahuddin, told me unequivocally in Khartoum, the
nation's capital, that Sudan will honor the referendum results. And it's certainly plausible that north and south will
muddle through and avoid war, for both sides are exhausted by years of fighting.
Here in Juba, the South Sudan capital, I met Winnie Wol, 26, who fled the civil war in 1994 after a militia from the north
attacked her village to kill, loot, rape and burn. Her father and many relatives were killed, but she escaped and made her
way to Kenya - and eventually resettled as a refugee in California. She now lives in Olathe, Kan., and she had returned
for the first time to Sudan to visit a mother and sisters she had last seen when she was a little girl.
Ms. Wol, every bit the well-dressed American, let me tag along for her journey back to her village of Nyamlell, 400 miles
northwest of Juba.
The trip ended by a thatch-roof hut that belonged to her mother, who didn't know she was coming - so no one was
home. Ms. Wol was crushed.
Then there was a scream and a woman came running. It was Ms. Wol's mother, somehow recognizing her, and they flew
into each other's arms.
To me, it felt like a peace dividend.
Yet that peace is fragile, and Ms. Wol knows that the northern forces may come back to pillage again. ""I don't want
war,"" she said, ""but I don't think they will allow us to separate.""
My own hunch is that the north hasn't entirely decided what to do, and that strong international pressure can reduce
the risk of another savage war. If President Obama is ever going to find his voice on Sudan, it had better be soon."
32;fyi
32;"RELEASE IN PART
B6
fyi"
32;"Great - I have to brief her tomorrow on Haiti - I will tell her we are re-looking at it.
cdm"
32;
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, April 23, 2010 11:46 AM
H
Sullivan, Jacob J; Burns, William J
FW: Americans held in Iran"
32;"Remind me to discuss this traffic w/ you.
Cdm"
32;
32;For you eyes only
32;Going running at 8am
32;"Yes
B5
For discussion:
B6
1. INL
cdm"
32;"Correct -
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Wednesday, March 24, 2010 6:49 AM
H
RE: Personnel"
32;yes — I can talk now — does now work for you?
32;
32;"1. Colorado
2. June 2011
3. Policy plan"
32;Nice.
32;Remind me to discuss when we talk
32;Yes - will call at 930am - have calls starting now
32;fyi
32;Well well
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, April 30, 2010 11:16 AM
H
remind me to discuss"
32;
32;fyi
32;"High Representative and 3 State Secretaries)
Importance: High
Haiti Donor Conference Update.
See below.
We have calls for you to call Qatar and UAE for funds (also on your call sheet was Saudis and Kuwait — have not seen
them register yet nor have they told our embassies yet).
Also — am going to head to Haiti for day on the CoDEL and sit with GOH on the development authority — just had long
convo with WJC.
cdm"
32;Fyi
32;FYI
32;fyi
32;
32;"FYI below on French statement on Haiti and U.S. support:
Paris, January 19, 2010
COMMUNIQUE
During their telephone conversation last week, the President of the Republic and President Obama expressed the
resolute commitment of our two countries in Haiti, and decided to combine their efforts in order to deal with the urgent
humanitarian situation and to respond, in the future, to the enormous reconstruction requirements.
The French authorities have, since then, been entirely satisfied with the cooperation between our two countries and,
beyond that, the continuous coordination between the Crises Centers of the Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs
and the U.S. Department of State. They want to pay tribute to the United States' extraordinary mobilization efforts in
support of Haiti and the vital role it is playing on the ground."
32;fyi
32;
32;agree
32;"Per the earlier email
cdm"
32;"Importance: High
FYI — I think we should do"
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, March 26, 2010 6:33 PM
Mills, Cheryl D
Fw: Wynn Resorts as Sponsor"
32;fyi
32;"Not now - calling then going to bed. B6
XO"
32;"I am traveling outside of the country, with intermittent access to my email. If you need to reach me urgently please
contact Nora Toiv, Toivnf@state.gov, 202-647-8633 or Joanne Laszczych, laszczychj@state.gov, 202-647-5548.
Thank you
cdm"
32;
32;
32;
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Wednesday, January 20, 2010 7:20 AM
FW: It Never Rains.....
fyi"
32;
32;Taking off
32;"Be
Will call after 1pm - on calls until llam to get legislation"
32;
32;"FYI
INTERNATIONAL NEWS #843
June 21, 2010
by Rex Wockner
Iceland legalizes same-sex marriage
The Icelandic parliament, Albingi, legalized same-sex marriage June 11. The vote was 49-0. Fourteen MPs
skipped the vote.
Same-sex couples will be able to marry starting June 27.
The registered-partnership apparatus that gay couples used in the past will no longer be available.
The national LGBT association, Samtokin 78, said Iceland had removed the last obstacle to equal rights for all.
Iceland is the ninth nation where same-sex couples can marry nationwide and the 11th nation where same-sex
marriage is possible.
Icelandic Prime Minister Johanna Siguroardottir is openly lesbian.
Gay marriage also is legal in Belgium, Canada, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, South Africa, Spain,
Sweden, Mexico City, Connecticut, Iowa, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Vermont and Washington, D.C."
32;
32;"Finally.
For wjc"
32;
32;fyi
32;"I really like Rick
See b/I in case you get ques at press conf re urgent needs being crowded out by recovery
Cdm"
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, April 2, 2010 9:16 PM
H; Doug Band
Fw: Thank You
For wjc fyi too"
32;
32;fyi
32;
32;
32;fyi
32;nice
32;"At the foot of the master.
I learned.
cdm"
32;fyi
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Thursday, January 21, 2010 11:23 PM
Valmoro, Lona J; Abedin, Huma
FW: Dartmouth
You are getting a memo on universities.
FYI on this from Jim Kim"
32;
32;"I am traveling overseas and only have sporadic access to my email. If you need immediate assistance, please call State
Department Operations at 202-647-1512 and ask for Nora Toiv who can assist you.
cdm"
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD©state.gov>
Friday, January 22, 2010 6:01 PM
FW: haiti comments"
32;
32;"FYI:
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED January 22, 2010
NOTE FOR THE SECRETARY
FROM: G/TIP — Luis CdeBaca
SUBJECT: Child Trafficking in Haiti
G/TIP is gravely concerned about the potential for human trafficking (TIP) in the wake of
the earthquake, both as a result of the displacement of the population and the influx of troops
and aid workers. Even before the earthquake, there were in Haiti up to 300,000 restaveks
(children given away or sold by their parents and enslaved as domestic servants), as well as
reports that members of MINUSTAH used trafficked women in prostitution. In the 2009 TIP
Report Haiti was classified as a Special Case country with governance so dysfunctional it could
not be ranked.
The initial disaster response is focusing on immediate needs of food, shelter, and medical
care, but has thus far not addressed TIP prevention and protection issues. While attention is
being paid to the problems of orphans and adoptees, TIP was not adequately addressed in the
UN's initial flash appeal, so it is unclear which agency in the international system has the lead
on the ground. UNICEF has the child protection lead, UNFPA leads prevention of sexual and
gender-based violence, and IOM is tasked with shelter and camp management. We will work to
remedy, in a subsequent appeal, the omission of TIP from the operational plan.
We are moving to redirect $1 million of program funds that G/TIP has on Hispaniola and to
reprogram an additional $550,000; we will work with PRM to identify other funding
possibilities. Working through existing grantees and other experienced NG0s, it is our
intention to help resuscitate police child protection brigades that already exist in Haiti, to
rebuild capacity of Haitian organizations that protect restaveks, to prevent traffickers in the
Dominican Republic from enslaving displaced Haitians on farms and in prostitution, and to
educate Haitian parents of the risks of giving their children away in this time of crisis. We will
consult with partner agencies to ensure that the U.S. presence does not contribute to
trafficking. It will be important for the Department's messaging to convey our commitment to
fighting human trafficking in both the immediate and long term.
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED"
32;
32;FYI
32;
32;"FYI: From one of the folks we hired who had been working with Pierre Louis:
Lessons from the Aceh and Nias Multi-Donor Trust Fund
1. The Government of Indonesia (G01) responded to the Tsunami by issuing a series of government decrees,
and immediately organized both overview and relief efforts to ensure a rational and coordinated
response. The first task was to produce a Damage and Loss Assessment (DLA). The DLA was followed by
a more detailed Master Plan for Rehabilitation and Reconstruction (MPRR). The MPRR provided in-depth
sector plans, spatial planning, the governance and supervision arrangements of finances with
considerable attention to how to avoid or minimize corruption. The process behind the MPRR was
consultative, with a wide range of local stakeholders and public offices being heard. The MPRR was
presented on 26 March, only 3 months after the Tsunami.
2. The MPRR was to form the basis for a general three-stage strategy. The Relief phase was originally set to
six months, but was then reduced to three: January- March 2005. The Rehabilitation phase is to run for
about 21 months, through December 2006, and the Reconstruction phase from July 2006 through
December 2009. The MPRR provides a well defined phasing of interventions.
3. The objectives for the Relief efforts were humanitarian relief: rescue; food and medicine; emergency
infrastructure and temporary shelter; and burying the dead. The Rehabilitation phase is to restore
services to minimum level: public services; economic facilities; banking and financial institutions; trauma
treatments; secure land rights; law and order; and temporary shelter. Finally, Reconstruction is to rebuild
the region: rebuilding the economy (production, trade and banking); the transportation,
telecommunications, and social and cultural systems; improving institutional capacity; and housing.
4. The Government set up a ministerial-level agency to manage the MPRR program from Aceh itself, the
Rehabilitation and Reconstruction Agency for Aceh and Nias. The BRR was formally established end April
2005 and became operational early May. The World Bank Board on 30 March 2005 formally established
the Multi-Donor Trust Fund (MDF) with a Steering Committee comprised of BRR, GOI, donors and civil
society. Having a credible local coordinators was key to success.
5. The EC channels nearly 93% of its funds through the MDF, while only 2.5% of USD 400 million from the
US goes to the MDF. While payments into the fund were slow, disbursements out of it were to begin
with even slower. By October 2005, project agreements for about USD 200 million had been signed, but
only USD 3 million had actually been disbursed. Disbursements picked up the pace thereafter. The delay
was caused by two principal impediments: first, donors were quick to pledge funds, but getting all the
exact written agreements in place took time. This points to the need for donors to be flexible regarding
formal agreements, and accept simple, generic paragraphs that can contribute to speedy resolution of
slightly differing phrasings and concerns. Second, the processing time for project approval and
implementation was a concern. Since the MDF was to have funded projects on-budget, they had to be
implemented by government institutions. This crated bottlenecks.
6. Smaller donors joined because they wished to support the reconstruction efforts in Aceh but do not have
own capacity and often not strong views on how best to pursue this. They want the Bank to assume
fiduciary responsibilities for the funds in a high-risk environment, and also to take a lead in ensuring that
the funds go to prioritized activities. The MDF is thus seen a well-managed bank account with some paid-
for administrative services. However, the all-inclusive Steering Committee made membership large and
to some extent unwieldy, and forced it to discuss both policy and operational issues.
7. The Multi Donor Fund Secretariat has developed an Outreach Strategy that includes regular radio talk
shows, field visits to meet and discuss with beneficiaries and communication through advertisements as
well as a telephone hotline.
8. MDF received praise for engaging the Government of Indonesia (G01) in policy dialogue. The MDF is thus
an entry point for engaging on conditions for sustainability, relevance and impact.
9. Because the MDF does not accept strict ear marking of donor contributions — though it does allow for
preference indications — it means that the funds are freely available for programming according to the
criteria and priorities that the MDF agrees to. Given strong GOI participation, the MDF is seen as the
most successful instrument for harmonization and coordination in an environment that has been
criticized for a lack of coordination. The MDF's Mid Term Review conducted in 2008-2009 found that the
MDF had made a positive contribution to harmonizing donor efforts and to increasing the effectiveness
and efficiency of the reconstruction effort.
10. The MDF did not sufficiently engage the private sector and did not have a coherent job creation strategy.
The MDF lacked executive rights, but GOI and BRR are credited with leveraging a decisive response."
32;FYI
32;FYI
32;FYI
32;The trust fund
32;Services in Post-1[1].doc
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD©state.gov>
Sunday, January 24, 2010 9:41 AM
Sullivan, Jacob J
FW: from GOH - Montreal meeting talking points
See traffic at bottom which Bob Maguire (Haiti expert) sent to Leslie Voltaire (Haiti's rep to WJC Envoy office and UN)
who also forwarded to PM Bellerive.
cdm"
32;"Ruh-roh
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sunday, January 24, 2010 11:25 AM
On the Ground Intelligence"
32;"This document in text below is coming up the line to you as material for your trip. This is separate (but related) to what
we discussed earlier today. This focuses on the MDTF, using the tsunami model as a guide.
I also have tasked Jean-Louis to put together a think piece for this evening that we can look at re: the larger issue of
ensuring efficient, effective coordination of: bi-lateral donors investment, MDTF, and private fund/NGO efforts that all
must come together in a coherent fashion. Of not in this memo is fact that in tsunami, there was a GOI reconstruction
plan
See below on the Mu It-Donor Trust Fund
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED January 24,2010
INFORMATION MEMO FOR THE SECRETARY"
32;fyi
32;HRC/WJC: Read below - worth the read
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sunday, January 24, 2010 12:05 PM
The Broader Donor Coordination and Accountability
His reference to our ppt was to the donor coordination mechanism"
32;FYI
32;FYI
32;"I am currently traveling. If you need immediate assistance, please contact Nora Toiv (ToivNF@state.gov) or Joanne
Laszczych, (Laszczychl@state.gov) at 202-647-5548.
If it is an emergency after business hours, please reach out to our Operations Center to have them reach 'me.
Thank you
cdm"
32;FYI
32;"MISSING
FYI traffic."
32;"HRC
Attached and below is a concept note for how the donor coordination and leadership for Haiti's reconstruction could be
established, with key being, given Haitian's critical voice. It is modeled after tsunami entity that was created by GOI.
(Doug/Justin — can you get to WJC this evening?)
The assumptions underpinning this approach are at the bottom of the email.
cdm"
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.goy>
Sunday, January 24, 2010 9:40 PM
FW: Doctors report from Haiti
Depressing
See not only Mike's email — really see the incoming one.
cdm"
32;FYI
32;fyi
32;Think I may have sent this but interesting insights and overlapping ones.
32;mcgovern
32;"Agree - it we also have folks who need hosp care for a period; there are several things like this we should consider Sent
via BlackBerry by AT&T"
32;
32;
32;
32;
32;Your wish is my command ...
32;"I am currently traveling outside of the country with limited access to email. If you need immediate assistance, please
contact Nora Toiv (ToivNF@state.gov) or Joanne Laszczych, (Laszczych.l@state.gov) at 202-647-5548.
If it is an emergency after business hours, please reach out to our Operations Center to have them reach me.
Thank you
cdm"
32;Fyi — cir to team for addressing as appropriate
32;fyi
32;"Fyi
bent. rn Jun V+ LU..5.5.‘fi Lulu
Subject: Back Operation"
32;"and more
See traffic b/I
— Reason: 1.4(B), 1.4(D) — Declassify on: 02/08/2025"
32;"RELEASE IN PART
B6
I drove the roads - I live lots of packed hard snow and two stuck cars. It's
worse than it seems"
32;"more
Am going to connect w/ bellerive in am
— Reason: 1.4(B), 1.4(D) — Declassify on: 02/08/2025"
32;"more
If I can take a diff car I am going in; if not I'll work from here"
32;FYI
32;
32;"Importance: High
FYI
- - —"
32;Fyi
32;sigh
32;Will call when I get off call before 4pm
32;fyi
32;Checking
32;
32;Yep - speak w/ you then
32;
32;
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD©state.gov>
Tuesday, June 22, 2010 8:14 AM
FW: Rahm's long goodbye
Rahm's long goodbye
By: Glenn Thrush
June 22, 2010 04:34 AM EDT
For all the talk about Rahm Emanuel reaching for the ""eject"" button, the fiery White House
chief of staff isn't leaving in the immediate future — and could serve well into 2011,
according to people close to him.
""It's the opinion in the top levels of the White House that Rahm is going to be here longer
than many people think,"" said a senior administration official, speaking on condition of
anonymity.
Speculation about Emanuel's departure has been a favorite parlor game for nearly a year
— stoked by Emanuel's admission that he'd love to run for Chicago mayor (should current'
Mayor Richard Daley retire, of course), his own kvetching about the rigors of the job,
withering attacks on him from the left and the right and the fact that the average expiration
date on a chief of staff is 18 months.
Emanuel is leaving, but his departure date has proved to be profoundly elastic. Friends
and co-workers said he vacillates from day to day, sometimes minute to minute. He might
leave in December after the midterms; or he might stay until next summer, depending on
whether Daley runs or President Barack Obama asks him to stick around, they said.
And even as he pines for his native Chicago, Emanuel continues to put down real roots in
D.C., recently writing the check to enroll his children in the exclusive Maret School in
Washington through the 2011 school year, according to a person close to Emanuel.
He's shown few signs of loosening his grip on the tiller — bombarding White House
staffers with long-distance calls during the first days of the Gulf oil spill even as he
traveled in Israel for his son's bar mitzvah.
And in a broader sense, it's hard to imagine Emanuel's huge personality extracted from
the political, journalistic and bar stool life of Obama's Washington.
Take the last game of last week's NBA Finals, when any American voter could wander
into Tunnicliff's Tavern on Capitol Hill and witness one of the most powerful men in the
nation egging on the Boston Celtics — screaming at the flat-screen TV, actually — joined
by a merry band that included Sen. Max Baucus (D-Mont.); Sen. Chris Dodd (D-Conn.);
Jim Manley, spokesman for Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.); and a pair of
favorite reporters from The New York Times and The Washington Post.
Despite a British tabloid story asserting that Emanuel is sick of Obama's ""idealism"" and is
racing for the exit, the former Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee chairman
still loves the attention and power of his current job and hasn't made up his mind when
he's leaving, people who know him said.
""This is BS. And if you need it for translation, it is baseless,"" Emanuel said in a statement
pushing back against a story in the U.K.'s Daily Telegraph portraying Emanuel as restless!
and fed up.
Replacing Emanuel, when he eventually goes, will be no easy task for Obama and the
small clique of close advisers led by Pete Rouse, David Axelrod and Valerie Jarrett.
For one thing, Obama and company need to know what the post-November political
landscape looks like before picking a successor: If Republicans take back one or more
house of Congress, the new chief of staff will need to know how to leverage executive
power against a hostile Hill; if Democrats retain their majorities, Emanuel's successor will
need some of his legislative skills.
Barring a major course correction, Obama, who prizes loyalty and familiarity, isn't likely to
reach too far outside his inner circle, advisers said.
Still, the president is increasingly cognizant of his reputation for insularity and would quite
likely give a serious look at respected former Clinton chiefs of staff Leon Panetta, currenW
head of the CIA, or John Podesta, who runs the Center for American Progress, a major
liberal think tank with close ties to the administration.
Rouse, a senior adviser who served as Obama's Senate chief of staff, is considered the
best pure manager in the White House and a logical choice to replace Emanuel, according
to a half-dozen.administration officials and consultants.
But Rouse's colleagues say the quiet 60-year-old insider loves his work, the Grateful Dead
and his cats — but despises the spotlight and would most likely turn down the job unless
Obama insisted.
""The key thing about Pete is that the president trusts him and would feel very, very
comfortable with him in charge,"" said a Democratic consultant who knows both men well.
""But he probably won't take it.""
One possible candidate — deputy chief of staff Jim Messina, Emanuel's political go-to guy
— is likely to play a major role in Obama's 2012 reelection campaign and is expected to
move to Chicago sometime next year.
In Messina's absence, another Emanuel favorite — Deputy National Security Adviser Tom
Donilon — has emerged as a possible successor, according to people close to the
situation.
Obama has been impressed by Donilon's presentations at the President's Daily Briefing,
and the Rhode Island native has a wide variety of political and governmental experience,
serving as a congressional liaison under President Jimmy Carter, chief State Department
spokesman under President Bill Clinton and a campaign adviser who helped Obama
prepare for debates against John McCain.
One major Donilon drawback: He served as an executive vice president for Fannie Mae,
the bailed-out mortgage giant, and reportedly lobbied against stronger regulatory
oversight.
David Plouffe, Obama's 2008 campaign manager, is another contender, with a reputation
for discipline, team building and solid management skills. But Plouffe has been reluctant to
settle down in Washington, is earning a stellar living as a consultant and hates the press.
Former Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle is also a possible successor, even though
his nomination for Health and Human Services secretary was scuttled by revelations he
failed to report limo rides paid for by a corporate client.
Another White House aide, Phil Schiliro, is a favorite of Obama's for his legislative savvy
and political instincts. But critics said he lacks the range of policy and political experience
that other candidates possess, and that his mastery of the Hill won't mean much if
Democrats surrender their majorities in either house.
Then there's Ron Klain, 49, Vice President Joe Biden's brainy and politically astute chief
of staff, who is said to be intensely interested in making the move from the Eisenhower
Executive Office Building to the West Wing.
Klain — who also served as Al Gore's chief of staff — is well-regarded inside the White
House. Plus, he's got a touch of star power: Kevin Spacey played him in the HBO movie
""Recount,"" about his role in guiding the Gore campaign through the 2000 Florida recount.
Klain's downside: He's essentially an outsider who has yet to develop a serious rapport
with the president, according to insiders.
C 2010 Capitol News Company, LLC"
32;"See below — you fine with this?
cdm"
32;
32;Fyi
32;Fyi
32;FYI — see traffic below mine.
32;"From Toiv, Nora F
Sent: Tuesday, June 15, 2010 1:27 PM
To: Mills, Cheryl D
Subject: Remarks to participants at High Level Meeting on Food Security for All
1/26/09
S. Remarks to participants at High Level Meeting on Food Security for All
President Obama has made clear that alleviating hunger worldwide is a top priority of this Administration. As he said on
the first day of his Presidency, ""to the people of poor nations, we pledge to work alongside you to make your farms
flourish and let clean waters flow; to nourish starved bodies and feed hungry minds."" The President and I intend to focus
new attention on food security so that developing nations can invest in food production, affordability, accessibility,
education and technology.
http://www.state.gov/secretary/rm/2009a/01/115585.htm"
32;"also, IF you want to do any foreign/mccrystal calls:
- frattini can talk now (till 6pm)
- cannon can talk after 7pm
rest will have to be tomorrow (if we do them at all)"
32;fyi
32;"I am currently traveling outside of the country with limited access to email. If you need immediate assistance, please
contact Nora Toiv (ToivNF@state.gov) or Joanne Laszczych, (Laszczychi@state.gov) at 202-647-5548.
If it is an emergency after business hours, please reach out to our Operations Center to have them reach me.
Thank you
cdm"
32;NOTE TO HRC...
32;Importance: High
32;"FYI
I think we need smart ways to get one or two more folks in — like — Dan Baer and few others like that."
32;You fine with this for the P meeting on Monday— scroll down for all invitees.
32;fvi
32;Let me see what dates might work for this group.
32;We are going to postpone Monday's and start with tues or weds.
32;Fyi traffic
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sunday, June 27, 2010 6:48 AM
Re: With deep gratitude"
32;
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Thursday, May 6, 2010 3:18 PM
FW: Luis Alberto Moreno"
32;
32;
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, May 7, 2010 8:03 AM
H
Fw: Edward Campbell"
32;Fyi
32;"See the highlighted specifically.
cdm"
32;
32;
32;
32;
32;"graduate,-howard-university-student-beats-the-odds-050710
Importance: High
B6"
32;"I am traveling overseas, with only intermittent access to my email. If you need to reach me urgently please contact Nora
Toiv, Toivnf@state.gov, 202-647-8633 or Joanne Laszczych, laszczychj@state.gov, 202-647-5548.
Thank you
cdm"
32;
32;"I am traveling overseas and only have sporadic access to my email. If you need immediate assistance, please call State
Department Operations at 202-647-1512 and ask for Joanne Lasczcych who can assist you.
cdm"
32;"came to the beach on friday nite to having a good time - hope wedding was great.
nothing to report other than chris will stay through next fri
also talking to torn
On Sat, Aug 7, 2010 at 7:31 PM, H <HDR22@c1intonemail.com> wrote:
I'm in a car (on the way to another wedding!) on Long Island for the next hour. You can call me thru Ops on
my bb. Hope you had a good day.
B6"
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Wednesday, May 12, 2010 1:22 PM
FW: Haiti MDTF Contribution of $55M!
fyi"
32;Compliment for you. B6
32;
32;
32;
32;"B6'
RELEASE IN PART B6"
32;
32;FYI
32;FYI
32;
32;FYI — I invited her in since Ricardo reports to her and she and Craig have been doing the cuba engagement.
32;
32;Exactly
32;"I am currently traveling out of the country. If you need immediate assistance, please contact Joanne Laszczych,
(Laszczych1@state.gov) at 202-647-5548.
If it is an emergency after business hours, please reach out to our Operations Center to have them reach me.
Thank you
cdm"
32;Fyi
32;
32;
32;fyi
32;See WI as context fyi
32;"GAY COUPLE SENTENCED TO 14 YEARS IN PRISON IN MALAWI(SBU) The court imposed the maximum sentence against
the couple, accusing them of unnatural acts and gross indecency, according to press. Embassy Lilongwe notes the
decision reflects strong sentiment across the country opposing gay rights, adding the information minister stated the
government was pleased with the conviction. (Ops/Embassy Lilongwe telcon, AP)"
32;So nice
32;
32;
32;
32;"I can do 830pm at your house(or anytime tomorrow)
Cdm"
32;Tomorrow you and I have office time at 230pm for 45 min
32;
32;
32;FYI - will get Rob to write him a note unless you already did one for his own graduation.
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Saturday, May 29, 2010 9:55 AM
H
is monday better? B6"
32;"Will do -
X0
Cdm
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Saturday, May 29, 2010 10:27 AM
Re: is monday better? B6"
32;
32;"on monday so we set time for 1:30pm monday
advised i am getting report B6"
32;"FYI
Now one event (WFP and UNICEF — Sheeran and Lake will now be part of our event at UNGA).
cdm"
32;"I am traveling overseas and only have sporadic access to my email. If you need immediate assistance, please call State
Department Operations at 202-647-1512 and ask for Joanne Lasczcych who can assist you.
cdm"
32;
32;"did kidlet duty all weekend - will call you when you land
On Sun, Aug 15, 2010 at 6:10 PM, H <HDR22@c1intonemai1.com> wrote:
I'm on the way to the 8pm shuttle. Free until then and after thru ops on my bb or at home."
32;
32;One nice thing out of an otherwise messy trip (elections) ...
32;"I am currently traveling with intermittent access to email. If you need immediate assistance, please contact Nora Toiv
(toivnf@state.gov) at 202-647-8633 or Joanne Laszczych (Laszczych1@state.gov) at 202-647-5548.
If it is an emergency after business hours, please reach out to our Operations Center to have them reach me.
Thank you
cdm"
32;Tell you in person
32;
32;David is interested - we will need to discuss what I add to my discussion with torn re portfolio
32;FYI
32;
32;"Hurricane Tomas in route to Haiti to hit 4 Nov right now on southern claw.
SouthCom's announcement:
USS IWO JIMA DEPLOYS TO HAITI AS TROPICAL STORM APPROACHES
MIAMI - U.S. Southern Command directed the amphibious ship USS Iwo Jima (LHD 7) to steam toward Haiti today in
preparation for the forecasted arrival of tropical storm Tomas later this week.
Iwo Jima will deploy to Haiti from Suriname, where it arrived Thursday on its final country visit for Continuing Promise
2010, a four-month, humanitarian civic assistance deployment to eight nations in the Caribbean region. The ship is
scheduled to arrive in Haiti later this week.
Large amphibious ships, like Iwo Jima, resemble small aircraft carriers and include the ability to support helicopter and
landing craft operations to quickly move personnel and cargo, making it an ideal platform to support humanitarian-relief
missions on short notice.
A crew of 1,600 military and civilian medical, engineering, aviation, logistical and other support personnel are embarked
aboard Iwo Jima, including U.S. Navy engineers, a contingent of 500 Marines with logistical-support expertise,
volunteers from the U.S. Public Health Service and various non-governmental organizations (NG0s), as well as medical,
dental and engineering professionals from Europe, North America and South America.
Eight CH-46 Sea Knight, medium-lift, dual-rotor helicopters; two MH-60 Knight Hawk helicopters and two amphibious
landing craft units (ICU's) are on Iwo Jima to support the ship's operations.
Iwo Jima is a Wasp-class amphibious ship capable of speeds in excess of
20 knots that can provide robust ship-to-shore, as well as shore-to-shore logistics support during contingencies ranging
from traditional military operations to humanitarian and disaster-relief missions.
Because of the Caribbean region's history of severe-weather events during the peak months of the hurricane season, the
ship has remained in the area throughout its present deployment, ready to support U.S.
disaster relief efforts when directed.
Iwo Jima was in Port-de-Paix, Haiti, from July 24 through Aug. 3. It was the first stop on CP10 and the crew provided
medical assistance to more than 4,000 Haitian citizens, performed 32 surgeries, completed six engineering projects, and
delivered 231 pallets of humanitarian-assistance supplies donated by NG0s.
In September 2008, the amphibious ship USS Kearsarge deployed to Haiti to support U.S. relief efforts after a succession
of storms (Fay, Gustav, Hanna and Ike) devastated the country. Kearsarge provided robust air and sealift support,
delivering 3.3 million pounds of food, water and other aid to communities impacted by the disasters.
###
Related links:
About Continuing Promise 2010:
http://www.southcom.mil/AppsSC/factFiles.php?id=155
Photo of USS Iwo Jima:
http://www.southcom.mil/AppsSC/images/uploads/634159131775283089.jpg
CLASSIFICAT1ON:UNCLASSIFIED"
32;
32;Gotta love him
32;FYI
32;"isit AT Al Gezir October 8 2010 Final.docx
Fyi:
READOUT OF MEETING AT Al Gezira Club WITH HIS CHILDREN
On October 8, 2010 - went to the Al Gezira club to see his children
as per the court ordered visitation dated June 30, 2010, which stipulated twice monthly visits on alternate
nda s. This was the first such visit to take pl e visit was scheduled for 12:00 p.m.
and ACS Chief arrived at 11:55 a.m. he ked in with the security office at the club and then waited at the
playground for the children. At approximately 1:20 p.m., arrived with the children, her two brothers, and a
cousin. There was a discernible State Security presence througriout the visit.
At one point, the ACS Chief received a duty call and stepped 20 feet away from the group to handle the call.
Post continues to work closely with Egyptian authoritie:"
32;FYI
32;Give me 10 minutes to get to my car.
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, August 20, 2010 4:03 PM
FW: Congrats Again"
32;"Howard Dean sent email at the bottom
Any background on this?"
32;
32;
32;PERFECT
32;
32;See b/I traffic
32;
32;"I am currently out of the office. If you need immediate assistance, please contact Joanne Laszczych
(LaszczychJ@state.gov) at 202-647-5548.
Thank you
cdm"
32;
32;FYI
32;
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Wednesday, November 3, 2010 10:58 AM
FW: 11/3 0845 Meeting Readout"
32;See highlighted area of editorial
32;
32;
32;
32;
32;Any issues bif I pull the trigger?
32;
32;Fyi
32;Sigh - will send you traffic that lead to this response
32;Per my prior email — read traffic down
32;FYI
32;"See below.
No update yet - John is out and have not connected with Jack but will early am.
cdm"
32;"Am in office today.
Meetings at 8:30am, 9am, 9:30, 10am and then none b/w 11am - 2pm.
cdm
--"
32;
32;Fyi
32;
32;"+ caitlin
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sunday, Se tember 5, 2010 4:41 PM
H; kdowd
Laurenjilo Klevorick, Caitlin B
Re: Update on PSA"
32;
32;"Yes - will call later tonite or am.
Had b/fast vi/ Marty.
So will call re ME"
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Sunday, November 28, 2010 10:54 PM
H; cheryl.mills
Re: Wikileaks
B6
Agree"
32;FYI
32;"Pi now at 2:30pm on Thurs.
cdm"
32;
32;guidance from Cindy and Caitlin: Katie did the logo and website
32;"See WI
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, November 5, 2010 5:41 AM
Fw:"
32;Nice
32;FYI
32;
32;Traded w/ him - will get this am
32;
32;
32;"FYI — interesting.
Not sure if you have the background on this but happy to give.
cdm"
32;fvl
32;"HRC:
[Huma can you print for HRC]
Melanne is stepping through the QDDR and giving specific edits on each section to ensure the integration of gender.
In addition to that help, she shared her thoughts/concerns on the reorganization as it affects s/GWI. We already
determined from your earlier feedback that S/GWI would maintain a direct report to S (I actually always thought that
even with the reorganization of homes for many of the S offices, we still were maintaining a direct S/reporting so we are
revisiting this issue writ-large for the next draft to you. For example, we now know statutorily that S/CT legislatively is a
required S report).
That said, here is her narrative for your review for when we speak. I have embedded comments in caps in text after
each graph where relevant.
TO: Anne-Marie Slaughter
FROM: Melanne Verveer
DATE: November 4, 2010
RE: Gender Integration in the QDDR
The Secretary has declared time and time again that the empowerment of women is ""at the heart of the foreign
policy of the United States."" Our collective task is to realize this principle by integrating gender into the policies and
programs of the State Department and USAID in an enduring way.
We are concerned that the current draft of the QDDR falls short of this call. In the existing draft, the Office of
Global Women's Issues falls under a new Under Secretary for Civilian Security, Democracy and Human Rights while
retaining the Ambassador-at-Large for Global Women's Issues who reports directly to the Secretary. This new structure
misses the simple but important reality that women are half of the world's population and that the major security,
economic and social challenges of this century cannot be solved without them. These issues cut across the work of the
department and touch virtually all regions, though we place special emphasis on regions in which women and girls
are most vulnerable, such as in countries experiencing conflict and transition. Locating the office within one bureau
makes it impossible for the Office to implement its very charge — to integrate gender effectively into the work of the
entire State Department.
Therefore, gender must be integrated throughout all of the regional and functional bureaus rather than located
within one bureau. Women should be integral to all of our diplomatic efforts—from traditional bilateral and multilateral
relationships, strategic dialogues, and public diplomacy, to our relations with civil society, community leaders and other
non-state actors. Women are also important to consider in all of our policy initiatives, including global health, food
security, climate change, economic issues, human rights, and peace and security. We must institute rigorous
institutional mechanisms to ensure that all bureaus, both regional and functional, consider gender in diplomacy and
development.
In order to integrate gender effectively throughout the work of the Department, we recommend the following
approach to planning, budgeting, structure and evaluation:
Maintain visibility and focus on gender. Retain the Ambassador-at-Large for Global Women's Issues who
reports to the Secretary. This position embodies our commitment to and advocacy for gender equality as an essential
part of diplomacy and development and signals our understanding that this is important to the national security of the
United States. In addition, the office advances a coherent and coordinated strategy on gender throughout the State
Department and USAID. [DONE]
Ensure that gender is effectively addressed throughout all bureaus and missions. We recommend the
following structural changes at State. First, make the Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary (PDAS) in all regional and
functional bureaus responsible and accountable for their bureaus' work on gender. The Office of Global Women's Issues
would serve as a resource to the PDAS on these issues. Second, assign specialized gender liaisons to regional bureaus
for purposes of integration, where needed. Third, include training and capacity development for employees on gender
Issues (in both Foreign and Civil Service as well as for political appointees). Fourth, evaluate the PDAS in each bureau on
gender integration in policies and programs (including, for example, as a component in the Performance Evaluation
System). Similarly, require each Chief of Mission to be responsible and accountable for the mission's work on gender, to
assign personnel with expertise to manage the work on gender, to require personnel to receive training on gender
issues, and to be evaluated on this work. A parallel structure should be put in place at USAID, and our diplomacy and
development work on gender should be coordinated and complimentary.
[THIS IS RECOMMENDATION, WITH SOME VARIATION, MADE FOR MANY AREAS — PUBLIC DIPLOMACY,
MULTILATERAL AFFAIRS, AND OTHERS — CHALLENGE WILL BE TO IDENTIFY HOW TO ADDRESS EFFECTIVELY AND CREAT A
PDAS JOB THAT IS MEANINGFUL GIVEN THE NEW RESPONSIBILITIES SOUGHT TO BE IMPOSED THROUGH THAT
POSITION]
Include gender in strategic planning and budget allocation. We recommend continuing the requirement
initiated last year that all bureaus include a plan for gender integration in their annual Strategic Plan and Budget
proposal. Each bureau is required to describe how their policies and programs will improve gender equality and how
that will strengthen their work more generally. They are also required, to the extent possible, to outline what portion of
their policies and programs target or affect women and girls. [THIS ALREADY IS IN PLACE AND WOULD BE RETAINED]
Measure impact. Develop indicators and long-term evaluation systems to measure the impact of programs on
women and girls. There are efforts underway currently within F and at USAID to consider how to improve our
measurement of impact on women and girls and to develop different and additional indicators where
appropriate. [SAME AS IMMEDIATELY ABOVE —THIS IS ALREADY IN PROCESS]
Happy to discuss.
cdm"
32;"My best time is
you want to do in person
so 6pm on; at 8 so am free also from then on and can come over if
Cdm"
32;Fyi
32;
32;fYI
32;Fyi
32;fyi
32;FYI
32;
32;
32;Just called you - call when cony
32;"I am currently out of the office with limited access to email. If you need immediate assistance, please contact Nora Toiv,
toivnf@state.gov, or Joanne Laszczych, laszczychj@state.gov, at 202-647-5548.
If this is an emergency, please call the Operations Center and have them reach out to me.
thank you.
cdm"
32;
32;"Jake -
Re the matter we discussed - no on-going representation since 2001.
Cdm"
32;You should discuss Dan's email w/ S on plane
32;fyi
32;
32;"RELEASE IN PART
1.4(B),B1,1.4(D)
HRC
Just fyi for you - note the highlighted parts."
32;Today: Statement from Lisa McGovern
32;
32;Anyone else you want?
32;"I am currently out of the office traveling overseas with limited access to email. If you need immediate assistance, please
contact Joanne Laszczych at 202-647-5548.
If this is an emergency, please call the Operations Center and have them reach out to me.
thank you.
cdm"
32;See below
32;"FYI
Forwarded message"
32;Scroll down
32;"Fyi
Howard fell ill overseas in egypt
They got him help, hospital care and other support"
32;"Context
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Tuesday, October 19, 2010 10:01 PM
Fw: Thank you"
32;
32;
32;FYI
32;--•
32;FYI
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Wednesday, December 22, 2010 11:48 AM
FW: QDDR FOLLOWUP
Sigh — despite my having advised otherwise ..."
32;
32;"HRC:
(Oscar — can you print for her)
Below is the draft OMB letter. After you review, we will send it to OMB with the goal to get it to them early afternoon. I
am heading to a lunch and then back — you can reach me or Jeanne through Ops.
Cdm
Dear Mr. Lew:
B
B5
B
Sincerely,
Hillary Rodham Clinton
Secretary of State
Enclosure:
As stated."
32;FYI
32;thanks
32;See highlighted
32;"Nice piece
Caitlin had made me talk to him last monday"
32;I can do now if you can - otherwise, noon
32;Will call you at house
32;No worries
32;Will shoot you time later - have fun
32;
32;"Sorry
I can talk later - will that work?"
32;
32;Will do
32;
32;"Cheryl Mills
Thursday, October 21, 2010 10:59 PM
FW: FYI
see traffic — steinberg saying he's here to stay beyond the date al k was going to write (dec)"
32;
32;fyi
32;
32;FYI
32;sigh
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Thursday, December 30, 2010 3:07 PM
Kendall, David; H
RE: Attorney-client privileged/confidential
Happy New Year to you both and to the Kendall extended family.
Xo
cdm"
32;"HRC
Attached is the ppt that AMS will give tomorrow at the A/S meeting. It likely will take most of the time to go
thorough.
We are not handing out copies until others who are editing it have had the chance to go through it carefully.
If you have the chance, take a look through and make sure nothing is too problematic for flashing on the
screen, recognizing the goal is by the end of the day, to have a version that can be handed out on Weds to the
Hill and internally.
cdm <<2010-11-14 Condensed QDDR 945pm-images.pptx>>"
32;
32;
32;
32;See VI for sr team
32;
32;"need for authorization language and that money has not moved
FYI"
32;One of missing balloonist is
32;Calling you at 9pm
32;"1. Israel
2. strobe"
32;"Experience in Southeast Asia [John Carland]
below"
32;"So glad you were born!
Kiss your mom for me - she did us right bringing you into the world.
XO
Cdm"
32;Scroll down to her note
32;Am now - getting off plane
32;"Tuesday - 2 Nov - 7am
Nice — lawyer for the Korean investors"
32;"See traffic below - read from bottom up.
cdm"
32;"Pinstripes to cargo pants -- Clinton tailors new
vision for diplomacy
By Elise Labatt, CNN
October 27, 2010 12:51 p.m. EDT
STORY HIGHLIGHTS
• It is the first-ever undertaking for the State Department
• Approach will focus on American leadership through civilian power
• Going forward, diplomats likely to wear cargo pants as a pinstriped suit.
Washington (CNN) -- Secretary of State Hillary Clinton is outlining how she plans to redefine U.S. diplomacy and
development ahead of a top-down review which has taken place this year and will be released in the coming weeks.
In an essay in the November/December issue of Foreign Affairs, Clinton previews the Quadrennial Diplomacy and
Development Review, commonly referred to as the QDDR. The review, the first-ever such an undertaking for the
State Department, is meant to balance a similar quadrennial review by the Defense Department that projects their
strategy and priorities.
The new approach to development, Clinton says, will focus on American leadership through civilian power. Both
Clinton and Secretary of Defense Robert Gates and have talked about ""demilitarizing"" foreign policy, and Clinton
says the QDDR will suggest how to do that, with a whole new set of resources for diplomacy and development,
much of which will be geared toward fragile states in conflict or crisis.
In the article, Clinton painted the broad strokes of the document, which she called a blueprint for reforms to be
implemented over the next four years. Those reforms include modernizing and coordinating diplomacy across U.S.
government agencies, creating a stronger nexus between diplomacy and development and ensuring that
development undertaken by the U.S. has a lasting and ""sustainable"" impact.
""Economic growth is the surest route out of poverty, and expanding and strengthening middle classes around the
world will be key to creating the just and sustainable international order that lies at the heart of the United States'
national security strategy,"" Clinton wrote in Foreign Affairs. She said that the U.S. ultimate goal in development was
to ""put itself out of business"" by boosting up countries to assume responsibility for their own projects and future.
President Barack Obama laid out the vision and the basic pillars of the policy in September at the United Nations
General Assembly when he released the ""U.S. Global Development Policy,"" which changes U.S. efforts to focus on
building up countries that demonstrate good governance and economic potential.
But the QDDR will outline how to put that policy into practice. Officials say the 150-page document will detail
everything from how the United States conducts multilateral diplomacy, how the United States undertakes
""stabilization"" efforts in post-conflict areas, how the State Department works with USAID and contractors to the
types and numbers of personnel needed to implement the new approach.
American diplomats going forward, Clinton said, are as likely to wear cargo pants as a pinstriped suit."
32;
32;
32;
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Friday, October 29, 2010 8:59 PM
Fw: DAC Chair Election
Fyi"
32;Fyi re reaction to your words B6
32;
32;
32;
32;"Email from Eric
Background for you"
32;
32;
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Tuesday, December 7, 2010 1:28 PM
Laszczych, Joanne
Fw: Draft Embassy Statement
Print this traffic for HRC"
32;
32;"This is the statement we released late last night.
Election results order Manigault, Celestin, MartieIly.
May be good to have Tom Adams give you a quick update today.
Cdm"
32;Fyi
32;"See traffic b/I
I think this is - I think this may be
That said, you can have a longer process on this for folks to feel heard.
But in name of intellectual honesty,
See b/I - from bottom up.
Cdm"
32;Can I call you
32;"You have agreed
Ellen is making last argument
I want you to know that is coming in case you want to do that.
Cdm"
32;"We have that two, but again
Jake was talking to
Cdm"
32;"Sigh
Fyi"
32;
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Saturday, December 11,2010 12:08 PM
Fw: LEAHY Calls For Freeze Of Funds To Haiti's Central Government And Of Travel Visas
For The Government's Leaders
Traffic b/I explains"
32;"Government And Of Travel Visas For The Government's Leaders
I am currently out of the office and unavailable before 6:00pm EST today, December 10. If you need immediate
assistance, please contact Nora Toiv, toivnf@state.gov, or Joanne Laszczych, laszczychj@state.gov, at 202-647-5548.
If this is an emergency, please call the Operations Center and have them reach out to me.
thank you.
cdm"
32;"See NI
Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Saturday, December 11,2010 1:36 PM
Fw: S is calling Leahy today - thx for all the help; advise if a diff no for him today"
32;"For The Government's Leaders
Interesting"
32;Fyi Classified by DAS, A/GIS, DoS on 08/27/2015 — Class:
32;
32;OMG — I just opened this!
32;"Are still here and so appreciative for all you did tonight and over the last several days.
You gave many the ability to push through.
XO
Cdm"
32;"My flight takes off at 8 so call before if you have a minute.
CDM"
32;
32;Fyi
32;-^
32;Traffic below from bottom up
32;"Agree — he did all the writing and integrating in the first instance and stayed up over the last 48 hours to integrate
everything."
32;"Nice
Forgot to tell you about our harrowing circling and attempted landings last night ..."
32;
32;"Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov>
Thursday, December 16, 2010 9:28 AM
FW: From Pakistan"
32;"THE NBC/YORKER
December 14, 2010
The Envoy
Posted by Hendrik Hertzberg
Last night, as I was unlocking my bike on a windswept Greenwich Village sidewalk after leaving a holiday party, a friend
approached, cell phone in hand. A few minutes earlier, she and I had been inside, chatting happily amid the buzz and warmth of
a holiday party. Now she had tears in her eyes. ""Richard Holbrooke died,"" she said.
Notwithstanding the hospital bulletins since he fell ill on Saturday—critical condition, damaged aorta, emergency surgery—this
sudden, awful ending was a shock, because Richard Holbrooke was such an astounding volcano of vitality. Everything about
him was large: his physical size, including the ultimate ""in your face"" face, a face like a Times Square billboard; his buzz-saw
voice, a highly expressive instrument, equally adept at piano (a side-of-the-mouth, gossipy wisecrack, often pleasingly nasty)
and forte (a high-decibel outburst of anger or indignation, almost always calculated for effect); his appetites (for experience, for
danger, for praise, for power, for fun); and his ambitions (for himself, for his beliefs, for the United States, for the world). He
was no doe-eyed peacenik, but as a diplomat he labored long and hard to seek alternatives to war and ways to end particular
wars. He was sentimental about his own unsentimentality, romantic about his own tough-guy realism.
Unlike my tearful informant, who had known Holbrooke as a family friend since she was a little girl, I was acquainted with him
in the casual way of many journalists and editors. He was a peer as well as a ""source,"" a prolific and forceful writer whose
favorite venues, The New Republic and The New Yorker, happened to be the places where I've spent my working life. He was
gregarious and fond of big, splashy black-tie evenings. The last time I saw him was six weeks ago, on November 1st, at the
New York Public Library's ""Literary Lions"" celebration. At the pre-dinner reception, where he would normally have been on
his feet, looming large, he repaired to a folding chair behind a little table and let his wife, Kati Marton, bring the party to him.
At sixty-nine he was tired—that much was obvious—but he was as sharp and voluble as ever. He still had plenty to do.
Not long after Holbrooke achieved his greatest diplomatic triumph by negotiating the 1995 end to the Balkan wars, I asked him
if he liked Warren Zevon's wonderful song ""The Envoy."" He said he'd never heard of it. The next day I sent him a CD. After
that, he mentioned it every single time I've seen him, up to and including that NYPL gala, saying he puts it on, loud, when he
needs a lift. And no wonder: his life was a drama, and he liked it that way.
If the Supreme Court had allowed the votes to be counted in 2000, then the Envoy, almost certainly, would have become the
Secretary of State, and the next decade would have unfolded very differently. As it is, Holbrooke has left a stronger, more
positive, more creative mark on history than all but a few of those who have held that post. He certainly did not die of a broken
heart—Kati Marton saw to that—but it was surely the ghastly, impossible demands of his last, impossible assignment that
brought on the rending of his aorta. He died for his country as surely as any soldier. And his deathbed words may turn out to be
the most important he ever spoke.
Photograph: Marco Di Lauro/Getty Images
Read more
http://www. newyo rker. corn/on line/b log s/hend ri khe rtzberq/20 10/1 2/ho lb rooke. htm 1?p ri ntab le=true#ixzz
1 8HjNL4kn"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
209;"We need to ck family's druthers. If they are OK, we should put something out from you tonight.
Also, everyone will assume the first statement was about Chris so we need to make clear this is a second death and/or
name both.
---"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
24;"I will be out of the office June 29 - July 5. For urgent matters, please contact reinesp@state.gov.
Thanks,
Caroline
311"
24;"Adler, Caroline E <AdlerCE@state.goy>
Saturday, June 27, 2009 3:30 PM
Re
Secretary Clinton -
Wow - thank you so much for taking the time to send me
Caroline
It continues to be an honor to work for you."
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
34;"Good Afternoon,
I work as a Help Desk Analyst and it has come to my attention that one of our customers has been receiving permanent
fatal errors from this address, can you please confirm if you receive this message.
Thank you for your assistance,
Christopher
Christopher Butzgy
VES-IRM (POEMS)
202-647-8700
This e-mail is Unclassified based on the criteria of E.O. 12958"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
148;"Below please find the list of those 39 Democrats who voted against the H.3962 (The Affordable Health Care for America
Act).
Bobby Bright, Alabama District 2-Montgomery
Parker Griffith, Alabama District 5-Huntsville
Artur Davis, Alabama District 7-Birmingham (retiring)
Mike Ross, Arkansas District 4-Prescott
Betsy Markey, Colorado District 4-Fort Collins
Allen Boyd, Florida District 2-Monticello
Suzanne Kosmas, Florida District 24-New Smyrna Beach
Jim Marshall, Georgia District 8-Macon
John Barrow, Georgia District 12-Savannah
Walt Minnick, Idaho District 1-Boise
Ben Chandler, Kentucky District 6-Versailles
Charles Melancon, Louisiana District 3-Napoleonville (retiring)
Frank Kratovil, Maryland District 1-Stevensville
Collin Peterson, Minnesota District 7-Detroit Lakes
Travis Childers, Mississippi District 1-Booneville
Gene Taylor, Mississippi District 4-Bay St. Louis
Ike Skelton, Missouri District 4-Lexington
John Adler, New Jersey District 3-Cherry Hill
Harry Teague, New Mexico District 2-Hobbs
Michael McMahon, New York District 13-Staten Island
Scott Murphy, New York District 20-Glens Falls
Eric Massa, New York District 29-Corning
Mike McIntyre, North Carolina District 7-Lumberton
Larry Kissel!, North Carolina District 8-Biscoe
Heath Shuler, North Carolina District 11-Waynesville
Dennis Kucinich, Ohio District 10-Cleveland
John Boccieri, Ohio District 16-Alliance
Dan Boren, Oklahoma District 2-Muskogee
Jason Altmire, Pennsylvania District 4-McCandless
Tim Holden, Pennsylvania District 17-Saint Clair
Stephanie Herseth Sandlin, South Dakota At Large Member-Brookings
Lincoln Davis, Tennessee District 4-Pall Mall
Bart Gordon, Tennessee District 6-Murfreesboro
John Tanner, Tennessee District 8-Union City
Chet Edwards, Texas District 17-Waco
Jim Matheson, Utah District 2-Salt Lake City
Glenn Nye, Virginia District 2-Norfolk
Rick Boucher, Virginia District 9-Abingdon
Brian Baird, Washington District 3-Vancouver"
148;"This evening cloture was invoked on the motion to proceed to Majority Leader Reid's health care bill, 60 to 39.
It was a straight party line vote. Despite some early concern over how they would vote, Senators Ben Nelson, Landrieu,
and Lincoln voted with the caucus. Each has warned they're not a guaranteed ""yes"" vote on final passage.
Senators voted from their seats, and Senator Dodd sat in the chair during the vote. The vote was followed by brief
applause.
Per the UC agreement negotiated by Reid and McConnell, this evening's cloture vote will also double as the vote on the
underlying motion to proceed, meaning the Senate will recess after the vote and will be on the health care bill when it
returns from the Thanksgiving recess."
148;"Senator Voinovich missed the vote.
I'm trying to find out if Leadership knew he was going to be missing or not. Although he is retiring, it's a little odd given
how historically significant the vote is."
148;"You may have already heard this, but wanted to alert you that Senator Dorgan this evening announced
that he would not seek reelection and is retiring.
He would have been up for reelection in November but his numbers were solid and he wasn't facing a
particularly strong field.
Below is a copy of his statement:
""Over this holiday season, I have come to the conclusion, with the support of my family, that I will not be
seeking another term in the U.S. Senate in 2010. It is a hard decision to make after thirty years in the
Congress, but I believe it is the right time for me to pursue these other interests. Let me be clear that
this decision does not relate to any dissatisfaction that I have about serving in the Senate. Yes, I wish
there was less rancor and more bipartisanship in the U.S. Senate these days. But still, it is a great
privilege to serve and I have the utmost respect for all of the men and women with whom I serve.""
Miguel E. Rodriguez
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Senate Affairs
Bureau of Legislative Affairs
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-2645
rodriguezme@state.gov"
148;"Cloture was invoked on Lael Brainard's nomination this afternoon, 84-10.
Miguel E. Rodriguez
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Senate Affairs
Bureau of Legislative Affairs
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-2645
rodriguezme@state.gov"
148;"Lael Brainard was confirmed 78-19 this afternoon.
Miguel E. Rodriguez
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Senate Affairs
Bureau of Legislative Affairs
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-2645
rodriguezme@state.gov"
148;"Thank you for your message.
I am currently out of the office and will return on Monday, January 3, 2011. I will be checking my messages regularly.
Thanks."
148;"You voted against raising the debt limit on the following occasions:
June 11, 2002
May 23, 2003
March 16, 2006
Additionally, on March 11, 2004, you voted for a Lautenberg amendment that would have struck a provision in the CR
raising the debt limit.
Increases to the debt limit were also debated and considered by the Senate on March 17, 2004 and September 27, 2007.
You did not cast a vote either time."
148;"After nearly two months of legal wrangling, Senator Murkowski was finally certified as the winner of the Alaska Senate
race on Thursday. The Governor and Lt. Governor signed the paperwork certifying the result, in time for the Senator to
be sworn in next Wednesday with the rest of her colleagues."
148;
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
170;"Associated Press
Published September 21, 2012
BENGHAZI, lli3YA — Hundreds of protesters angry over last week's killing of the U.S. ambassador to Libya stormed the
compound of the Islamic extremist militia suspected in the attack, evicting militiamen and setting fire to their building
Friday.
In an unprecedented show of public anger at Libya's rampant militias, the crowd overwhelmed the compound of the
Ansar Al-Sharlah Brigade in the center of the eastern city of Benghazi.
Ansar Al-Shariah fighters initially fired in the air to disperse the crowd, but eventually abandoned the site with their
weapons and vehicles after it was overrun by waves of protesters shouting ""No to militias.""
""I don't want to see armed men wearing Afghani-style clothes stopping me in the street to give me orders, I only want to
see people in uniform,"" said Omar Mohammed, a university student who took part in the takeover of the site, which
protesters said was done in support of the army and police.
No deaths were reported in the incident, which came after tens of thousands marched in Benghazi against armed
militias. One vehicle was also burned at the compound.
For many Libyans, the Sept. 11 attack on the U.S. Consulate in Benghazi was the last straw in one of the biggest
problems Libya has faced since the ouster and death of longtime dictator Moamrnar Qaddafi around a year ago -- the
multiple mini-armies that with their arsenals of machine guns and rocket-propelled grenades are stronger than the
regular armed forces and police.
The militias, a legacy of the rag-tag popular forces that fought Qaddafi's regime, tout themselves as protectors of Libya's
revolution, providing security where police cannot. But many say they act like gangs, detaining and intimidating rivals
and carrying out killings.
Militias made up of Islamic radicals like Ansar Al-Shariah are notorious for attacks on Muslims who don't abide by their
hardline ideology. Officials and witnesses say fighters from Ansar Al-Shariati led the attack on the U.S. consulate, which
killed Amb. Chris Stevens and three other Americans.
After taking over the Ansar compound, protesters then drove to attack the Benghazi headquarters of another Islamist
militia, Rafallah Sahati. The militiamen opened fire on the protesters, who were largely unarmed. At least 20 were
wounded, and there were unconfirmed witness reports of three protesters killed.
Earlier in the day, some 30,000 people filled a broad boulevard as they marched along a lake in central Benghazi on
Friday to the gates of the headquarters of Ansar Al-Shariah.
""No, no, to militias,"" the crowd chanted, filling a broad boulevard. They carried banners and signs demanding that
militias disband and that the government build up police to take their place in keeping security. ""Benghazi is in a trap,""
signs read. ""Where is the army, where is the police?""
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739766
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045425
B6
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739766
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
Other signs mourned the killing of Stevens, reading, ""The ambassador was Libya's friend"" and ""Libya lost a friend.""
Military helicopters and fighter jets flew overhead, and police mingled in the crowd, buoyed by the support of the
protesters.
The march was the biggest seen in Benghazi, Libya's second largest city and home to 1 million people, since the fall of
Qaddafi in August 2011. The public backlash comes in part in frustration with the interim government, which has been
unable to rein in the armed factions. Many say that officials' attempts to co-opt fighters by paying them have only fueled
the growth of militias without bringing them under state control or integrating them into the regular forces.
Residents of another main eastern city, Darna, have also begun to stand up against Ansar Al-Shariah and other militias.
The anti-militia fervor in Darna is notable because the city, in the mountains along the Mediterranean coast north of
Benghazi, has long had a reputation as a stronghold for Islamic extremists. During the Qaddafi era, it was the hotbed of a
deadly Islamist insurgency against his regime.
A significant number of the Libyan jihadists who travelled to Afghanistan and Iraq during recent wars came from Darna.
During the revolt against him last year, Qaddafi's regime warned that Darna would declare itself an Islamic Emirate and
ally itself with Al Qaeda.
But now, the residents are lashing out against Ansar Al-Shariah, the main Islamic extremist group in the city.
""The killing of the ambassador blew up the situation. It was disastrous,"" said Ayoub al-Shedwi, a young bearded Muslim
preacher in Darna who says he has received multiple death threats because has spoken out against militias on a radio
show he hosts. ""We felt that the revolution is going in vain.""
Leaders of tribes, which are the strongest social force in eastern Libya, have come forward to demand that the militias
disband.
Tribal leaders in Benghazi and Darna announced this week that members of their tribes who are militiamen will no
longer have their protection in the face of anti-militia protests. That means the tribe will not avenge them if they are
killed.
Activists and residents have held a sit-in for the past eight days outside Darna's Sahaba Mosque, calling on tribes to put
an end to the ""state of terrorism"" created by the militias.
Militiamen have been blamed for a range of violence in Darna. On the same day Stevens killed in Benghazi, a number of
elderly Catholic nuns and a priest who have lived in Darna for decades providing free medical services, were attacked,
reportedly beaten or stabbed. There have been 32 killings over the past few months, including the city security chief and
assassinations of former officers from Qaddafi's military.
Darna's residents are conservative, but they largely don't fit the city's reputation as extremists.
Women wear headscarves, but not the more conservative black garb and veil that covers the entire body and face. In
the ancient city's narrow alleys, shops display sleeveless women dresses and the young men racing by in cars blare
Western songs.
And many are impatient with Ansar Al-Sharjah's talk of imposing its strict version of Islamic law. The group's name
means ""Supporters of Shariah Law.""
""We are not infidels for God sake, We have no bars, no discos, we are not practicing vice in the street,"" said Wassam ben
Madin, a leading activist in the city who lost his right eye in clashes with security forces on the first day of the uprising
against Qaddafi. ""This is not the time for talk about Sharjah. Have a state first then talk to me about Sharjah.""
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739766
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045426
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739766
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
""If they are the 'supporters of Sharjah' then who are we?"" he said. ""We don't want the flag of Al Qaeda raised over
heads,"" he added, referring to Ansar Al-Shariah's black banner.
One elder resident at the Sahaba Mosque sit-in, Ramadan Yousset said, ""We will talk to them peacefully. We will tell
them you are from us and you fought for us"" during the civil war against Qaddafi. But 'if you say no (to integrating into
the) police and army, we will storm your place. It's over.""
Officials in the interim government and security forces say they are not strong enough to crack down on the militias. The
armed factions have refused government calls for them to join the regular army and police.
So the government has created a ""High Security Committee"" aimed at grouping the armed factions as a first step to
integration, Authorities pay fighters a salary of as much as 1,000 dinars, around $900, to join -- compared to the average
police monthly salary of around $200.
However, the militias that join still do not abide by government authority, and critics say the lure of salaries has only
prompted more militias to form.
Officials and former rebel commanders estimate the number of rebels that actually fought in the 8-month civil war
against Gadhafi at around 30,000. But those now listed on the High Security Committee payroll have reached several
hundred thousand.
""All these militia and entities are fake ones but it is mushrooming,"" said Khaled Hadar, a Benghazi-based lawyer. 'The
government is only making temporarily solutions, but you are creating a disaster.""
###
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739766
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045427"
170;
170;"Statement on the Death of American Personnel in Benghazi, Libya
It is with profound sadness that I share the news of the death of four American personnel, in Benghazi, Libya yesterday.
Among them were United States Ambassador to Libya Chris Stevens and Foreign Service Information Management
Officer, Sean Smith. We are still making next of kin notifications for the other two individuals. Our hearts go out to all
their families and colleagues.
A 23. year veteran of the Foreign Service, Ambassador Stevens died last night from injuries he sustained in the attack on
our office in Benghazi.
I had the privilege of swearing in Chris for his post in Libya only a few months ago. He spoke eloquently about his
passion for service, for diplomacy and for the Libyan people. This assignment was only the latest in his more than two
decades of dedication to advancing closer ties with the people of the Middle East and North Africa which began as a
Peace Corps Volunteer in Morocco. As the conflict in Libya unfolded, Chris was one of the first Americans on the ground
in Benghazi. He risked his own life to lend the Libyan people a helping hand to build the foundation for a new, free
nation. He spent every day since helping to finish the work that he started. Chris was committed to advancing America's
values and interests, even when that meant putting himself in danger.
Sean was a husband and a father of two, who joined the Department ten
years ago. Like Chris, Sean was one of our best. All the Americans
we lost in yesterday's attacks made the ultimate sacrifice. We condemn this vicious and violent attack that took their
lives, which they had committed to helping the Libyan people reach for a better future.
America's diplomats and development experts stand on the front lines every day for our country. We are honored by
the service of each and every one of them.
1#tit
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739906
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045243"
170;"Story below is as good and straightforward as they come. It's a reflection of one of the best new-old partnerships I've
seen in the bulding: Caroline Adler and PA's two in-house new media guys, Luke Forgerson & Dan Schaub..Refelcting
your prioritization, she - along with Katie Dowd, have helped these guys unleash the full potential of this new kind of
communications.
Selling it to Matt was the easy part. Those guys are doing all the real work. And anecdotally, they're seeing great
success already - with a lot more to come.
E-diplomacy? Hillary Clinton Embraces New Media By MATTHEW LEE AP Sat, Mar 21, 2009
WASHINGTON (AP) — Her videos aren't quite viral yet and she's not tweeting, but Secretary of State Hillary Rodham
Clinton is embracing new media, using the Web to promote the agency and her role as the nation's top envoy.
In less than three months, Clinton's State Department has embarked on a digital diplomacy drive aimed at spreading the
word about American foreign policy and restoring Washington's image. Part of a broader Internet outreach by President
Barack Obama's administration, Clinton's Web efforts already have outpaced those of her predecessors.
Since taking over at Foggy Bottom, Clinton's team has built on e-diplomacy innovations developed during George W.
Bush's presidency:
- They have revamped the department's Web site (http://www.state.gov) and the Dipnote blog (http://blogs.state.gov
and http://twitter.com/dipnote) with a fresh array of features, graphics and colorful posts.
- Users can track her foreign travel on an interactive map (http://www.state.gov/secretary/trvI/map/?trip_id5)
- They can keep up virtually with her every move through Facebook, Twitter, Flickr and YouTube
(http://www.youtube.com/user/statevideo).
- They can pose questions through an ""ask-the-secretary"" column
(http://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/ask/secretary/117297.htm) that recently was revised to ""text the secretary.""
(http://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/ask/secretary/120236.htm)
""New media is critical in this new era of diplomacy, where smart power and expanded dialogues are essential to
achieving our foreign policy goals,"" said Cheryl Mills, Clinton's longtime confidante and chief of staff.
Even for a government Web site, early indications show a surge in interest, according to internal State Department
statistics provided to The Associated Press.
Daily views of the Dipnote have doubled from 10,000 a year ago to 20,000 today, with 700 subscribers to its RSS feed,
twice as many as in March 2008. The number of followers of the department on Twitter has tripled since Jan. 20, when
Obama took office, while the department's Facebook friends have increased by 2 1/2 times in the same period.
8
""What they are bringing in is more willingness to experiment,"" said Peter Daou, who was Clinton's Web guru during her
2008 presidential run. ""They are starting to push the envelope.""
What remains unclear, though, is whether the spike in interest reflects the revamped Web site or the public's fascination
with Clinton's latest career shift.
""The personality behind it can't be dismissed,"" said Daou, who now blogs on human rights and other issues for U.N.
Dispatch (http://www.undispatch.com).
Like Obama, Clinton carries a Blackberry, but she is not allowed to use it on the department's secure seventh floor
where her office is. Aides say she takes an active role in answering questions from the Web, responding to bloggers and
pushing her agency's new media agenda.
""The United States Government is behind nearly everybody, except in certain discrete areas, in terms of technology,""
she told department employees at a town hall meeting in February. ""We are, in my view, wasting time, wasting money,
wasting opportunities, because we are not prepared to communicate effectively with what is out there in the business
world and the private world.""
Clinton was quick to embrace new media at the start of her presidential campaign. She announced her entry into the
race in February 2007 on the Web and followed with regular Internet chats and Internet fundraising appeals.
Nonetheless, Clinton was surpassed by the Obama campaign's mastery of the Internet and social networking sites.
Obama used the Web to raise record donations and identify and orchestrate an army of volunteers.
Clinton was first lady when the first White House Web site debuted in 1994. It was a bare-bones operation compared
with what is available now. Three years later, the State Department went online during Secretary of State Madeleine
Albright's tenure.
But it wasn't until 2007, under Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice's spokesman, Sean McCormack, that the
department's public affairs shop began exploring new media in earnest. McCormack started the Dipnote blog, which
some foreign service veterans predicted would fail, given the private and stuffy nature of diplomacy.
The site endured under Rice. Clinton has retooled Dipnote with a Twitter feed and a broader range of posts from
diplomats.
It's more than just window dressing. This past week, diplomats used Twitter to ""tweet"" down false rumors they feared
might lead to a siege on the U.S. Embassy in Madagascar.
On her first two foreign trips, to Asia and then the Middle East and Europe, local bloggers were ""embedded"" with the
traveling press corps, broadening the audience for Clinton's official meetings and public appearances, which often
produce more personal than policy questions.
On her question site, Clinton has responded to a varied questions, from ""Should the U.S. engage in direct dialogue with
Hamas?"" to ""How did you like meeting the Japanese students?""
By the end of Clinton's trip to the Mideast, her ""text the secretary"" feature had received nearly 2,000 text messages. On
both trips, Clinton also participated in Webcasts. One in Beijing on climate change generated more than 10.2 million
page views, more than 50,000 comments and 7,000 questions, according to the statistics.
Clinton's staff say they plan to venture further into the realm of social networking, an animated online world called
Second Life, and cell phone technology. The department hopes to follow through on a Bush administration organized
9
project that brought together Facebook, Google, Howcast, YouTube, AT&T, MTV, Columbia Law School, Access360Media
and Gen-Next for an Alliance of Youth Movements summit.
It also wants to expand on X-Life, a mobile phone game launched in February that is aimed at helping youth in the
Middle East learn English and teaching them about American history, culture and values.
Copyright © 2009 The Associated Press. All rights reserved.
10"
170;Yes, should be doable. On it.
170;"* Miguel: ""Andrew did great this afternoon. FYI, Lowey delivered HRC's statement. Very well received.""
* Richard Fontaine: ""Andrew is not even rocking - just tapping his foot. Did y'all train him for.this or something?? And
half the room are Shapiros, it's like his friggin Bahr Mitzvah.""
* Former NSC staffer Michael Allen: ""Shapiro son removed from the room, screaming bloody murder in the hallway.""
* Mike Feldman: ""Jon Lovett removed from the room, screaming bloody murder in the hallway.""
* Laurie Rubiner: ""Jim Webb arrives, looks typically angry.""
* Derek Chollet: ""Shapiro comes out strong against piracy. Bold stand.""
* Jon Lovett: ""Jeanne Shaheen listening very closely. Barbara Boxer is distracted. The other anonymous old men on dais
seem confused and unsure where they are.""
Hearing concludes at 3:33:43 PM EDT
2014-20439 Doc No. C05761605 Date: 06/30/2015"
170;"I'm usually the pessimist, but I'm not sure this is as dire as it seems in the moment from 10,000 miles away.
First, the world/media is fixated on the President's speech, the imagery from Riyadh dominates, there's no Honduras
footage of interest, which is key. Speech tomorrow will blanket coverage and extinguish the Cuba stuff, so we just need
to weather the night.
Second, Tom & Dan did an on the record conf call not long ago and we think they did very well. Dan was especially
strong, and he's also speaking to people 1:1
Third, your statement was strong and the reporting will catch up with it, it's only been out 90 minutes.
Fourth, we are suffering from two significant tactical problems: 1) you are here and removed 2) our press corps was out
of position today and in flight, so the people we worked on all week and the ones likely to skew our way were replaced
by reporters not connected to us.
The two issues above will be rectified tomorrow in your two interviews - especially Greta who is malleable. We can use
that to make a strong case on the principle, and the simple fact Cuba wasn't in the OAS yesterday, and won't be
tomorrow. Everyday that passes reinforces that point. The time difference to East Coast will help us in moving
whatever is said in these interviews tomorrow.
Short term, we started the week showing we can engage with Cuba (mail, migration), and ending it showing we are
serious about our redlines
Long term, we stood up for human rights and that can only be a plus."
170;Yes, That's the plan.
170;"Because of the time difference, your clips were prepared at midnight Eastern Time so many are still early versions. But
what we're seeing online right now look MUCH better this morning than even 5 hours ago - it just took a bit for your
statement, our conf call, our pushback, and our travelers to catch up. Many including the Times take a very different
tone. And all note Cuba's not in. Mostly, stories are small and seem buried."
170;"I saw the piece yesterday and had stuck in yours today. But they should have identified it as NY Magazine, Not NY Times
Magazine
I think he's an online guy, will check
Good piece though. Accompanied by a great photo of you and the President outside the mosque"
170;"Reines, Philippe I <reinesp@state.gov>
Friday, May 29, 2009 9:48 PM
Sullivan, Jacob J
Re: Brazil and Mexico
If we set the expectation now that the outcome is likely to not go our way, ANY alternative - even one kicking the can
down the road as Jake outlines below - would be seen as a significant victory.
And as an added bonus, it would be an opportunity to highlight your personal dedication to and prioritization of human
rights/democracy, which we've been criticized for since China."
170;"Tom backgrounded them yesterday in the briefing room, not certain but don't think he put down any groundwork on
this specifically.
But in terms of setting expectations it would be a combo of a few overt and not overt things:
- Seeing what Admin/For Pol Members of Congress are on TV today and the shows tomorrow, all we need is one person
to float it.
- We have flight time tomorrow when Tom & Jake can do it on background or OTR.
- There's one blogger that folks loosely follow, I know how to get her something through a 3rd party.
- I have to talk to a few of our guys today like Matt Lee on misc stuff, and I'm sure he'll ask me something about the OAS
where I can easily say the folks in WHA are real pessimistic. And our travelers traffic info among themselves. The best
thing to put out there would be the notion that there are those who don't think you should go. If you don't, you don't.
But if you do, you chose to be direct, to make a principled stand.
Shouldn't be too tough, because the notion of Cuba being voted in is something they will WANT to believe, it'll make
good copy. And it makes it easier to explain any decision/outcome"
170;Back to two columns it is
170;"Most interesting observation of the day, from State:
""A statistical analysis of the data issued by the ministry of interior suggests a perfect linear relationship between votes
received by Ahmadinejad and Mousavi with an r-squared value of 0.9995, a near impossibility in nature.This suggests
that the ballots were never counted or were.abandoned after it was clear Ahmadinejad was going to lose. Statistically, it
is impossible to maintain such a perfect linear relationship consistently through all stages of vote counting. We would
expect variation as the votes were coming in, due to differences expected between the cites and the country side and
hetereogeneity amoung ethnic groups.This to me is the most concrete evidence I have seen""
84"
170;"No, it's only an internal assessment from someone in the Iran Watch Office. Kay added me to their updates so I'm
seeing their internal chit chat.
I have to admit I don't understand statistics enough to gauge it's accuracy, but they are trying to prove the accusation of
egregious fraud. The only other #s are actual vote tallies coming from the Iranian Interior Ministry, showing Mousavi
winning by far - but the #s are unconfirmed.
Since it's after 4am in Tehran, most of the reporting now is focusing on tumult
Nothing is coming from State publicly aside from what you said this afternoon."
170;Aren't you giving a big speech now?
170;
170;You're email went through
170;
170;"Reines, Philippe I <reinesp@state.gov>
Friday, August 7, 2009 3:11 PM
H
Sullivan, Jacob J
Re:"
170;"Breaking News: ""Missing Ship Reported Seen Off Cape Verde Islands""
We could have done a pirate event!"
170;"PIR
Friday, August 14, 2009 5:46 PM
H; Huma Abedin; CDM; Jake Sullivan
Dr. A
RELEASE IN PART B6
Her parting words to us when we got out of the vans at State:"
170;"Jake, when you can, I think I speak for the group when I say that we'd like and After Action Report on last night's date
with Dr. Senkler - especially curious if your plan to transition from the initial expanded group to a more restricted
bilateral meeting worked as planned.
And while I'm writing, here is about the most straightforward piece about HRC ever written in the NY Times - with this
classic line: ""...a Liberian man with a long wooden horn followed her around most of the visit, blowing out loud funny
noises whenever she said something striking.""
Clinton Ends Africa Tour, Vowing to Stay Involved By JEFFREY GETTLEMAN The New York Times
Published: August 15, 2009
SANTA MARIA, Cape Verde - After a grueling seven-nation, 11-day trip, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton
wrapped up her Africa tour on Friday by reaffirming her promise to renovate American relations with the continent.
""I leave Africa after this remarkable trip even more committed,"" Mrs. Clinton said before leaving Cape Verde.
""I have seen the joy and energy Africans have, evidenced not just by the boogieing, but by the hard work and
perseverance,"" she said, referring to a recent comment from her husband, former President Bill Clinton, that she knew
how to ""boogie"" with African dancers.
""And we've seen the worst humanity can do to itself,"" she added, presumably referring to Congo, where Mrs. Clinton
met victims of a brutal civil war that just does not seem to end.
Mrs. Clinton seemed satisfied that she had accomplished her mission: strengthening American relations with crucial
allies on the continent, like Nigeria and South Africa, and sending a message of ""tough love,"" as she called it, to nations
like Kenya and Congo.
Over all, she said, the United States wants to work more closely with African nations as a partner, not simply as a patron
or dispenser of aid. In exchange, she said, African leaders must deliver democracy and good government.
Mrs. Clinton vowed to stay on top of Africa, even after she gets back to Washington, closely monitoring the issues she
addressed on her tour. She also pointed to Cape Verde, a set of palm-studded islands best known for their beaches and
enormous tourist hotels, as an example of what good leadership can do.
""This is possible,"" she said. ""You create not just economic growth but a sense of human dignity and possibility.""
Kenya. South Africa. Angola. Congo. Nigeria. Liberia. And finally Cape Verde. Mrs. Clinton saw with her own eyes some of
Africa's most promising countries - and some of its most troubled ones. In Kenya, she pushed for the government to
prosecute perpetrators of the postelection violence last year. In South Africa, the big issue was Zimbabwe and how the
South African government should do more to help ease the crisis there.
In Angola, the theme was good governing practices and oil, a strategic concern of the United States given the many
inroads China has made there and elsewhere in Africa in its hunger for natural resources. In Congo, Mrs. Clinton was
passionate about the need to end the nation's rape epidemic.
""The secretary's visit to the heart of the world's deadliest war zone in eastern Congo was a potential game-changer for
that conflict,"" said John Prendergast, a founder of the Washington-based Enough project. ""Her commitment to
addressing root causes such as the conflict minerals that power our electronics industry was a refreshing contrast to the
usual disaster sympathy tourism of visiting dignitaries.""
""Now,"" he added, ""comes the hard part: making good on the promises and living up to the high expectations
engendered by her visit.""
In Nigeria, Mrs. Clinton pressed for electoral changes. In Liberia, she praised the country's president, Ellen Johnson
Sirleaf, the only woman in Africa to be elected head of state.
The Liberian visit had a special warmth, almost like a meeting of long-lost cousins. Liberia was founded in the 19th
century by freed American slaves, and the country's flag, the people's names and even the police uniforms with plastic-
brimmed hats were all reminiscent of the American versions. Mrs. Clinton received possibly her most exuberant
welcome there, and a Liberian man with a long wooden horn followed her around most of the visit, blowing out loud
funny noises whenever she said something striking.
""I love that - the horn - I want to take that guy with me wherever I go,"" she said.
In Cape Verde, Mrs. Clinton seemed to have few bones to pick. For once, she said, she had a cheat sheet on a country
that included a list of far more positives than negatives. The country has fewer than 500,000 people and has escaped the
turmoil that has engulfed so much of Africa. The all-inclusive, poolside buffet resorts here feel like something found in
CanctIn or the Bahamas.
Mrs. Clinton called Cape Verde ""a model of democracy and economic progress in Africa.""
On Friday, just as she had at every stop, she started her speech by saying, ""I bring you greetings from President Obama.""
She called him a ""son of Africa"" and said that under the Obama administration, the United States was determined to
help Africa reach its promise.
###"
170;"PIR <
Saturday, August 15, 2009 10:28 AM
H
Re: AAR
She painted a very positive portrait of the trip, and said that nothing knocked you off stride, you staved focused.
I'm just reading the clips now and the wrap up pieces are uniformly terrific. Might have been unorthodox, but you
certainly raised the awareness in the US about Africa. The debate over the legitimacy of covering your town hall
remarks all come with a heavy dose of the depravity occurring there. So there's a silver lining as people talk about
something they otherwise wouldn't - irrespective of what triggered the conversation."
170;"Huma said she's getting to you now
It's laid out on the first page, but we're doing two calls
1pm: call w/Axelrod, Gibbs, Denis and Nancy Deparle to brf you (their request)
1:45 call/us, plus Denis
I'll MC both and make sure you know exactly who is on
Ops will connect you to both"
170;"Report: North Korea willing to hold talks with US AP
By KWANG-TAE KIM
Associated Press
Sat Jul 25, 4:51 am ET
SEOUL, South Korea — North Korea has indicated its interest in holding direct talks with the United States, a news report
said, after the two sides traded barbs over Pyongyang's nuclear weapons programs at a security forum. ""We are not
against a dialogue. We are not against any negotiation for the issues of common concern,"" Japan's Kyodo news agency
quoted North Korean ambassador to the United Nations Sin Son Ho as saying Friday. But the ambassador, speaking in
New York, dismissed the possibility of a return to stalled nuclear negotiations involving the two Koreas, the U.S., Japan,
China and Russia, saying ""the six-party talks are gone forever."" The U.S. has offered to hold talks with the North within
the six-nation process if it returns to the negotiating table and takes irreversible steps for denuclearization. Last
weekend, Assistant U.S. Secretary of State Kurt Campbell indicated that the chances for direct talks between North
Korea and the U.S. were slim. ""Our bilateral negotiations are between the U.S. and South Korea about our collective
approach"" to the North, Campbell told reporters in Seoul. Sin said the five other parties to the nuclear talks ""cheated""
North Korea, accusing them of not implementing what they had agreed under a disarmament-for-aid deal. No more
details were given in the Kyodo report. Sin was not available for comment Saturday. The North Korean mission to the
U.N. declined to comment. North Korea quit the nuclear talks in April to protest a U.N. statement condemning a rocket
launch. North Korea insisted it sent a satellite into orbit, while the U.S. and its allies said it was actually a long-range
missile test. North Korea conducted its second nuclear test in May and a barrage of missile tests in July, drawing
international condemnation and new U.N. sanctions. U.S. and Chinese officials are expected to discuss North Korea's
nuclear programs and other regional security issues at a strategic dialogue next week in Washington. ""North Korea will
be a significant topic, but obviously one among many,"" State Department spokesman Philip Crowley said Friday in
Washington. The U.S. and North Korea engaged in a sharp war of words earlier this week over U.S. Secretary of State
Hillary Rodham Clinton's recent comment likening the regime in Pyongyang to ""small children"" demanding attention. At
a regional security conference in Thailand, Clinton also said the North ""has no friends left."" North Korea's Foreign
Ministry described her Thursday as ""a funny lady"" who sometimes ""looks like a primary schoolgirl and sometimes a
pensioner going shopping.""
298"
170;"; Huma Abedin B6
I'm checking with Pat on the 50k, will work with Jack & Jake on rest.
Also, Huma has for you a follow up memo from the prep call"
170;"I will actually meet you at your house, I have the answers to most of your questions from last night
And will include the 5 points"
170;"o Is the 50k figure State and AID?
YES [U/S Kennedy & Ops]
o Re Sudan: how do you pronounce Abyei? What is % and dollar increase in
2010 budget for ops and aid?
Per the VoA pronunciation guide: ab-YAY (Ops). The FY09 base level for Sudan assistance programs is $327m vs $403m
in FY10- mostly related to infrastructure and election/referendum requirements. This does NOT include several hundred
million dollars of food aid and other humanitarian assistance that is also provided yearly (close to $400m on top of
numbers
below) a year. Also in addition is funding for UN peacekeeping missions- also nearly $200m a year [D(L)]
o I don't understand the answer to the prostitution policy question. What's the simplest way to say it?
[Per D(L): Because of the politics of health care reform on the Hill, there is great sensitivity about addressing the
substance of these issues at this time.]
Q: Under the previous Administration organizatioris receiving HIV\AIDs funds from the U.S. Government were required
to have a policy explicitly opposing prostitution and sex trafficking. Is that going to continue to be the policy of this
Administration?
A: This matter has been the subject of litigation - outside groups have sued both USAID and the HHS over the policy -
and we recently notified the Court that we needed additional time to review the policy. That review is underway; no
final decisions have been made.
On 7/25/09 8:46 PM, ""Evergreen"" <Hdr22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
> Is the 50k figure State and AID?
> Kurdistan election results?
> Can you find out for me how many Nazi prison camps we had in US during
> WW2 and what we did w the detainees--did we ever try any? Did we
> deport them after war ended?
> Re Sudan: how do you pronounce Abyei?
> What is % and dollar increase in 2010 budget for ops and aid?
>
> I don't understand the answer to the prostitution policy question.
> What's the simplest way to say it?"
170;"Oof, sorry
Yes"
170;"Whenever you do something big on TV we all hear from lots of folks saying you did great. But this time is noticeably
different. First, people across the spectrum - DC insiders, reporters, staff, ex-staff, friends of friends, WH folks, etc -
were blown away. Second, people were REALLY moved by the last segment, three people even told me they teared up.
I'm guessing and hoping you hear this directly from random folks in the coming days.
And I think because it's been a lousy couple of weeks for the Admin, with mixed messages and bad news, coupled with
many people seeing you for the first time for an extended period talking about the job and your relationship with the
President, and that combo was probably the most powerful reminder since your speech in Denver that you're in a class
all your own (including the President who became enmeshed in the Gates incident)
That you didn't wait for the envoy question was key, you turned it into a strength. What you said about the President
and how you said it, one can't help but think how much of a team player you are and how remarkably you've adapted to
the role.
You were definitely on your game. You either threw a perfect game - or at least a no hitter. So this couldn't have gone
better, achieved everything we needed to times 10, and comes on the heels of a great 10 days.
Will be interesting to see the storyline that emanates from this. Because there was no substantive news, it'll be a focus
on style especially saving Biden."
170;"RELEASE IN PART
B5,B6
I'm not sure who's recommending what to you, I'm just coming into this at the 11th hour and not sure of the facts"
170;"PIR <preines(
Saturday, October 3, 2009 11:57 AM
H
Re: Sri Lanka
So all's well that ends well. Enjoy your weekend.
On 10/3/09, H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
> I want to see the proposed statement. Happy to have it issued in
> someone else's name. But I think we need to do it. So weigh in. Thx.
>"
170;That's the best plan
170;I have to let PJ respond, because I honestly don't know what was executed
170;"Pi, correct me if I'm wrong but I think the letter text was finalized, but not yet produced/delivered. If so, we will make
sure that happens asap, and shared with AFP (who is the only outlet I've seen on this today)"
170;"PIR
Sunday, October 4, 2009 9:58 AM
H
Re: Sri Lanka
I'm going to ride herd on this to make sure it gets done asap, and I'll give it to afp myself."
170;"Letter will be done and signed by Melanne by 11am, Bob Blake will get it to the SL FM through the Ambassador, and PA
will get it to AFP and other interest parties. So by noon everyone who needs it will have it"
170;"From your clips:
US Responds To Sri Lanka Protest Over Clinton Remark (AFP) Monday, October 5, 2009 AFP
WASHINGTON (AFP) - The United States, responding to protests from Sri Lanka over remarks by Secretary of State Hillary
Clinton, said it had no recent evidence of women being raped while in Sri Lankan government custody.
In a letter addressed to Sri Lanka's Minister of Foreign Affairs Rohitha Bogollagama, the State Department noted that the
US government and international human rights groups over the years had detailed ""numerous cases of rape and sexual
violence in Sri Lanka, particularly acts committed against women held in detention by the government.""
However, the letter signed by Melanne Verveer, ambassador at large for global women's issues at the State Department
said that ""in the most recent phase of the conflict, from 2006 to 2009 ... we have not received reports that rape and
sexual abuse were used as tools of war, as they clearly have in other conflict area around the world.""
""We hope that this clarification puts the issue in its proper context,"" the letter said, adding that Washington remains
concerned about extrajudicial killings, disappearances and detainee abuse in Sri Lanka.
""Secretary Clinton believes that Sri Lanka must focus to the future and move forward on the promotion of peace and the
protection of human rights,"" the letter said.
Sri Lanka lodged its protest with the US embassy in Colombo over the remarks made by Clinton last month to the United
Nations Security Council.
""We've seen rape used as a tactic of war before in Bosnia, Burma and Sri Lanka and elsewhere,"" the US secretary of state
had said during a resolution calling for an end to sexual violence in armed conflict, according to published reports of
Clinton's remarks.
Her comments sparked an outcry across Sri Lanka, where government forces in May crushed Tamil Tiger rebels after
decades of fighting.
Colombo faced condemnation for its handling of the final stages of the war against Tiger rebels and managed to stave
off a Security Council resolution calling for war crimes investigations thanks to the vetoes of China and Russia.
The United Nations has said that over 7,000 civilians perished in the first four months of intense fighting this year.
Sri Lanka is now facing international pressure to free 250,000 ethnic Tamil civilians who managed to escape the fighting
but are now held in internment camps while they are screened to see whether they were rebels.
B6"
170;"The only thing anyone yelled at you was ""WE LOVE YOU HILLARY"""
170;"Clinton Is?-over all it reflects your amazing strength of""Purpose""...keep on Sis and love
I think it was in your clips over the weekend but I will send it to your right now"
170;"PIR <preines
Monday, August 24, 2009 7:59 AM
H
Re: just read"
170;"It's quite possibly the best thing written about you as SecState. We're getting it around to friends & family, along with
People op-ed and NYT Mag q&a - was a great weekend in terms of positive press.
It's 3 a.m. Do You Know Where Hillary Clinton Is?
By David Rothkopf
Washington Post
Sunday, August 23, 2009
When it comes to Hillary Rodham Clinton, we're missing the forest for the pantsuits.
Clinton is not the first celebrity to become the nation's top diplomat -- that honor goes to her most distant predecessor,
Thomas Jefferson, who by the time he took office was one of the most famous and gossiped-about men in America --
but she may be the biggest. And during her first seven months in office, the former first lady, erstwhile presidential
candidate and eternal lightning rod has drawn more attention for her moods, looks, outtakes and (of course)
relationship with her husband than for, well, her work revamping the nation's foreign policy.
Even venerable publications -- such as one to which I regularly contribute, Foreign Policy -- have woven into their all-
Hillary-all-the-time coverage odd discussions of Clinton's handbag and scarf choices. Daily Beast editor Tina Brown, while
depicting herself as a Clinton supporter, has been scathing and small-minded in discussing such things as Clinton's
weight and hair, while her ""defense"" of Hillary in her essay ""Obama's Other Wife"" was as sexist as the title suggests.
Indeed, sexism has followed Clinton from the campaign trail to Foggy Bottom, as seen most recently in the posturing
outrage surrounding the exchange in Congo when Clinton reacted with understandable frustration to the now-infamous
question regarding her husband's views. Major media outlets have joined the gossipfest, whether the New York Times,
which covered Clinton's first big policy speech by discussing whether she was in or out with the White House, or The
Washington Post, where a couple of reporters mused about whether a brew called Mad Bitch would be the beer of
choice for the secretary of state.
Amid all the distractions, what is Clinton actually doing? Only overseeing what may be the most profound changes in
U.S. foreign policy in two decades -- a transformation that may render the presidencies of Bill Clinton and George W.
Bush mere side notes in a long transition to a meaningful post-Cold War worldview.
The secretary has quietly begun rethinking the very nature of diplomacy and translating that vision into a revitalized
State Department, one that approaches U.S. allies and rivals in ways that challenge long-held traditions. And despite the
pessimists who invoked the ""team of rivals"" cliche to predict that President Obama and Clinton would not get along,
Hillary has defined a role for herself in the Obamaverse: often bad cop to his good cop, spine stiffener when it comes to
tough adversaries and nurturer of new strategies. Recognizing that the 3 a.m. phone calls are going to the White House,
she is instead tackling the tough questions that, since the end of the Cold War, have kept America's leaders awake all
night.
In these early days of the new administration, it has been easy to focus on what Clinton has not achieved or on ways in
which her power has been supposedly constrained. Indeed, some of her efforts have been frustrated by difficult
personnel approvals or disputes with the White House about who should get what jobs. But this is the way of all
administrations. More unusual has been the avidity with which the new president has seized the reins of foreign policy --
more assertively than either George W. Bush or Bill Clinton before him. Obama's centrality amplifies the importance of
his closest White House staffers, while his penchant for appointing special envoys such as Richard Holbrooke (on
Afghanistan and Pakistan) and George Mitchell (on the Middle East) has been interpreted by some as limiting Clinton's
role.
Given the challenges involved, it was perhaps natural that the White House would have a bigger day-to-day hand in
some of the nation's most urgent foreign policy issues. But with Obama, national security adviser Jim Jones, Vice
President Joe Biden and Secretary of Defense Robert Gates absorbed by Iraq, Afghanistan and other inherited problems
of the recent past, Clinton's State Department can take on a bigger role in tackling the problems of the future -- in
particular, how America will lead the world in the century ahead. This approach is both necessary and canny: It
recognizes that U.S. policy must change to fulfill Obama's vision and that many high-profile issues such as those of the
Middle East have often swamped the careers and aspirations of secretaries of state past.
Which nations will be our key partners? What do you do when many vital partners -- China, for example, and Russia --
are rivals as well? How must America's alliances change as NATO is stretched to the limit? How do we engage with rogue
states and old enemies in ways that do not strengthen them and preserve our prerogative to challenge threats? How do
we move beyond the diplomacy of men in striped pants speaking only for governments and embrace potent nonstate
players and once-disenfranchised peoples?
In searching for answers, Clinton is leaving behind old doctrines and labels. She outlined her new thinking in a recent
speech at the Council on Foreign Relations in New York, where she revealed stark differences between the new
administration's worldview and those of its predecessors: The recurring themes include ""partnership"" and
""engagement"" and ""common interests."" Clearly, Madeleine Albright's ""indispensable nation"" has recognized the
indispensability of collaborating with others.
Who those ""others"" are is the area in which change has been greatest and most rapid. ""We will put,"" Clinton said,
""special emphasis on encouraging major and emerging global powers -- China, India, Russia and Brazil, as well as Turkey,
Indonesia and South Africa -- to be full partners in tackling the global agenda."" This is the death knell for the G-8 as the
head table of the global community; the administration has an effort underway to determine whether the successor to
the G-8 will be the G-20, or perhaps some other grouping. Though the move away from the G-8 began in the waning
days of the Bush era, that administration viewed the world through a different lens, a perception that evolved from a
traditional great-power view to a pre-Galilean notion that everything revolved around the world's sole superpower.
Obama and Clinton have both made engaging with emerging powers a priority. Obama visited Russia earlier this year
and will host Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh in his first state dinner in November. Clinton has made trips to
China and India, and she would have been with Obama in Russia had she not injured her elbow. Both have visited Africa
and the Middle East, reaching out to women and the Islamic world.
On many critical agenda items -- from a rollback of nuclear weapons to the climate or trade talks -- such emerging
powers will be essential to achieving U.S. goals. As a result, we've seen a new American willingness to play down old
differences, whether with Russia on a missile shield or, as Clinton showed on her China trip, with Beijing on human
rights.
At the center of Clinton's brain trust is Anne-Marie Slaughter, the former dean of Princeton's Woodrow Wilson School of
Public and International Affairs. Now head of policy planning at the State Department, Slaughter elaborated on the ideas
in Clinton's speech. ""We envision getting not just a new group of states around a table, but also building networks,
coalitions and partnerships of states and nonstate actors to tackle specific problems,"" she told me.
""To do that,"" Slaughter continued, ""our diplomats are going to need to have skills that are closer to community
organizing than traditional reporting and analysis. New connecting technologies will be vital tools in this kind of
diplomacy.""
A new team has been brought in to make these changes real. Clinton recruited Alec Ross, one of the leaders of Obama's
technology policy team, to the seventh floor of the State Department as her senior adviser for innovation. His mission is
to harness new information tools to advance U.S. interests -- a task made easier as the Internet and mobile networks
have played starring roles in recent incidents, from Iran to the Uighur uprising in western China to Moldova. Whether
through a telecommunications program in Congo to protect women from violence or text messaging to raise money for
Pakistani refugees in the Swat Valley, technology has been deployed to reach new audiences.
Of course, you need more than new ideas to revitalize the State Department; you need resources, too. The secretary has
brought in former Bill Clinton-era budget chief Jack Lew to help her claw back money for statecraft that many in Foggy
Bottom feel has been sucked off toward the Pentagon. She has also created special positions to back new priorities, such
as Melanne Verveer as ambassador at large for women's issues, Elizabeth Bagley to handle public-private outreach
worldwide and Todd Stern as the chief negotiator on climate.
Even just a few months in, it's clear that these appointments are far from window dressing. Lew, Slaughter and the
acting head of the U.S. Agency for International Development are leading an effort to rethink foreign aid with the new
Quadrennial Diplomacy and Development Review, an initiative modeled on the Pentagon's strategic assessments and
designed to review State's priorities. Stern has conducted high-level discussions on climate change around the world,
notably with China. Clinton made women's issues a centerpiece of her recent 11-day trip to Africa, where she stressed
that ""the social, political and economic marginalization of women across Africa has left a void in this continent that
undermines progress and prosperity.""
Clinton has also signaled the importance of private-sector experience by naming former Goldman Sachs International
vice chairman Robert Hormats, a respected veteran of four administrations, to handle economic issues at the State
Department, as well as Judith McHale, former chief executive of Discovery Communications, to run public diplomacy. In
the same vein, she has opened up Cuba to American telecommunications companies and reached out to India's private
sector on energy cooperation -- showing that this administration will seek to advance national interests by tapping the
self-interests of the business community. As with any new administration, there have been inevitable problems. The old
campaign teams -- Clinton's and Obama's -- still eye each other warily, but this feeling is gradually fading. And by most
accounts, the administration's national security team has come together successfully, with Clinton developing strong
relationships with national security adviser Jones and Defense Secretary Gates. Her policy deputy, Jim Steinberg, has
renewed an old collaboration with deputy national security adviser Tom Donilon; the two of them, working with Obama
campaign foreign policy advisers Denis McDonough and Mark Lippert, have formed what one State Department
seventh-floor dweller called ""a powerful quartet at the heart of real interagency policymaking."" Henry Kissinger may
have overstated matters when he said this is the best White House-State relationship in recent memory, but it's not bad,
while the State-Pentagon relationship is in its best shape in decades.
At the heart of things, though, is the relationship between Clinton and Obama. For all the administration's talk of
international partnerships, that may be the most critical partnership of all.
So far, according to multiple high-level officials at State and the White House, the two seem aligned in their views. In
addition, they are gradually defining complementary roles. Obama has assumed the role of principal spokesperson on
foreign policy, as international audiences welcome his new and improved American brand. Clinton thus far has echoed
his points but has also delivered tougher ones. Whether on a missile shield against Iran or North Korean saber-rattling,
the continued imprisonment of Aung San Suu Kyi in Burma or rape and corruption in Congo, the secretary of state has
spoken bluntly on the world stage -- even if it triggered snide comments from North Korea.
It is still early, and a president's foreign policy legacy is often defined less by big principles than by how one reacts to the
unexpected, whether missiles in Cuba or terrorism in New York. Promising ideas fail because of limited attention or
reluctant bureaucracies, and some rhetoric eventually rings hollow, as the self-congratulatory ""smart power"" already
does to me.
Nevertheless, there is evidence that, seven months into the job, Obama's unlikely secretary of state is supporting and
augmenting his agenda effectively. Not as Obama's ""other wife,"" not as Bill Clinton's wife, not even as a celebrity or as a
former presidential candidate -- but in a new role of her own making.
David Rothkopf is a visiting scholar at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace and the author of ""Superclass:
The Global Power Elite and the World They Are Making"" and ""Running the World: The Inside Story of the NSC and the
Architects of American Power."" He will be online to chat with readers Monday at 11 a.m. Submit your questions and
comments before or during the discussion."
170;"PIR <preine!
Wednesday, October 21, 2009 7:05 PM
H
'Burns.stride
Re: Jim Wallis Interview Request...
Will do
Burns, will email you separately"
170;Yes, we're trying to find a date that works for Les, but he is a little, shall we say picky.
170;"We've been trying for months, he's a little high maintenance, and has a habit as you're seeing of complaining to anyone
who will listen.
But we'll get there. This is my mission for today."
170;"I'll follow up
Might make most sense for WJC to issue a quote that talks about you too, like the Howard one"
170;Yes, and we can certainly do
170;"At bottom is the People op-ed. I just checked and ironically the figure comes from Melanne's testimony during an SFRC
hearing, where she stated: """"The scale and enormity of the violence directed at women [in the DRCI can scarcely be
adequately described. Some 1100 rapes are being reported each month, with an average of 36 women and girls raped
every day."". Triple checking the origins.
Hillary Clinton Pledges to 'Banish Sexual Violence'
Originally posted Friday August 21, 2009 12:30 PM EDT
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton may be taking some well-earned R&R in Bermuda this week, but last week, the former
First Lady and U.S. Senator wrapped up a grueling seven-nation diplomatic mission to Africa.
While much was made back home about her snapping at a Congolese student who asked her about Bill Clinton's
thoughts on a trade issue (""My husband is not the secretary of state, I am,"" she retorted), the emotional heart of her
tour was also her most dangerous stop — in Goma, inside the war zone in eastern Congo, where she tearfully met rape
victims on Aug. 11.In this exclusive Op-Ed piece for PEOPLE.com, Secretary Clinton shares what she learned on her visit -
and what she will do about it.
What I Saw in Goma
By Hillary Rodham Clinton
In 11 days of travel across Africa, I saw humanity at its worst — and at its best. In Goma last week, I saw both.
The Mugunga Internally Displaced Persons Camp sits in a land of volcanoes and great lakes on the edge of Goma, a
provincial capital in the eastern Congo. The camp is now home to 18,000 people seeking refuge from a cycle of violent
conflict that has left 5.4 million dead since 1998. Chased from their homes and villages by armed rebels and informal
militias, these men, women and children walked for miles with little food or water until they reached this relatively safe
haven.
Now they live in tents, one next to the other, row after row, some clinging to life, others hanging on to whatever
glimmer of hope remains in a region plagued by years of brutality. Many of these people have been robbed of their
homes, possessions, families and, worst of all, their dignity.
Women and girls in particular have been victimized on an unimaginable scale, as sexual and gender-based violence has
become a tactic of war and has reached epidemic proportions. Some 1,100 rapes are reported each month, with an
average of 36 women and girls raped every day.
I visited a hospital run by the organization Heal Africa and met a woman who told me that she was eight months'
pregnant when she was attacked. She was at home when a group of men broke in. They took her husband and two of
their children and shot them in the front yard, before returning into the house to shoot her other two children. Then
they beat and gang-raped her and left her for dead. But she wasn't dead. She fought for life and her neighbors managed
to get her to the hospital — 85 kilometers away.
I came to Goma to send a clear message: The United States condemns these attacks and all those who commit them and
abet them. They are crimes against humanity.
These acts don't just harm a single individual, or a single family, or village, or group. They shred the fabric that weaves us
together as human beings. Such atrocities have no place in any society. This truly is humanity at its worst.
But there is reason to hope. We have seen survivors summon the courage to rebuild their lives and their communities.
We have seen civic leaders and organizations come together to combat this appalling scourge. And we have seen health
care workers sacrifice comfortable careers so they can treat the wounded
in Goma, I met doctors and advocates who work every day to repair the broken bodies and spirits of women who have
been raped, often by gangs, and often in such brutal fashion that they can no longer bear children, or walk or work.
Caregivers like Lyn Lusi, who founded Heal Africa in Goma, and Dr. Denis Mukwege, who founded the Panzi hospital in
Bukavu, represent humanity at its best.
The United States will stand with these brave people. This week I announced more than $17 million in new funding to
prevent and respond to gender and sexual violence in the Democratic Republic of Congo. We will provide medical care,
counseling, economic assistance and legal support. We will dedicate nearly $3 million to recruit and train police officers
to protect women and girls and to investigate sexual violence. We will send technology experts to help women and
front-line workers report abuse using photographs and video and share information on treatment and legal options. And
we will deploy a team of civilian experts, medical personnel and military engineers to assess how we can further assist
survivors of sexual violence.
While I was in the DRC, I had very frank discussions about sexual violence with President Kabila. I stressed that the
perpetrators of these crimes, no matter who they are, must be prosecuted and punished. This is particularly important
when they are in positions of authority, including members of the Congolese military, who have been allowed to commit
these crimes with impunity.
Our commitment to survivors of sexual and gender-based violence did not begin with my visit to Goma, and it will not
end with my departure.
We are redoubling our efforts to address the fundamental cause of this violence: the fighting that goes on and on in the
eastern Congo. We will be taking additional steps at the United Nations and in concert with other nations to bring an
end to this conflict.
There is an old Congolese proverb that says, ""No matter how long the night, the day is sure to come."" The day must
come when the women of the eastern Congo can walk freely again, to tend their fields, play with their children and
collect firewood and water without fear. They live in a region of unrivaled natural beauty and rich resources. They are
strong and resilient. They could, if given the opportunity, drive economic and social progress that would make their
country both peaceful and prosperous.
Working together, we will banish sexual violence into the dark past, where it belongs, and help the Congolese people
seize the opportunities of a new day."
170;"To state the very obvious, you are not only speaking as the Secretary of State, but as a mother to an audience of
mothers
---"
170;To close the loop: the 1,100/month statistic comes from a UNICEF report and is widely accepted/used
170;"I'm reading an old Entertainment Weekly and came across a promotional photo of Hope Davis and Dennis Quaid as you
and President Clinton (along with Michael Sheen and Helen McCrory as the Blairs), for the HBO movie called ""The Special
Relationship"" (due in the spring) - thought you'd get a kick out of seeing a photo of the photo, attached
In the caption, Hope Davis says, ""They made special teeth for me because Hillary's are very unique. When I popped
them in, I suddenly looked very much like her."""
170;"I've attached the gorgeous cover as a PDF
Hillary's Moment: Clinton Faces the World
By Joe Klein
Time Magazine
Wednesday, Nov. 04, 2009
It was Halloween night in Jerusalem, and Benjamin Netanyahu came dressed as a peacemaker. ""We're prepared to start
peace talks immediately,"" the notoriously reluctant Israeli Prime Minister proclaimed, with U.S. Secretary of State Hillary
Clinton standing at his side, poker-faced. ""I think we should ... get on it and get with it.""
It was a ploy, of course. The Palestinians were tangled up in themselves, yet again. They had elections looming, and their
leader, Mahmoud Abbas, had to hang tough: he was demanding a total freeze to Israeli settlement-building on the West
Bank — which was precisely what the Obama Administration had previously said it favored. Netanyahu was offering a
partial freeze, not including new settlements in East Jerusalem, the desired capital of a future Palestinian state. This was
a nonstarter for the Palestinians, but it had the holographic glow of a step forward. It was an ""unprecedented"" offer,
Netanyahu trumpeted, with the joy of a chess master springing a trap.(See photos from 60 years of Israel.)
It was a tough moment for Clinton, playing second fiddle at the Bibi-does-Gandhi show. President Barack Obama had
softened his language on the settlements a few weeks earlier: instead of a total freeze, he had talked about Israeli
""restraint"" in settlement-building. And now Clinton seemed to cement the Administration's retreat, agreeing that
Netanyahu's proposal was, indeed, ""unprecedented,"" even though the U.S. still favored a total freeze. The most
important thing, she added, was for the parties to get to the table as quickly as possible. The onus was back on the
Palestinians — and the Palestinians quickly expressed outrage at the Obama Administration's retreat. Their Arab
neighbors soon joined in, causing Clinton to backtrack two days later, telling reporters the Israeli plan ""falls far short"" of
U.S. expectations, although she still insisted on calling it ""unprecedented,"" which was neither diplomatic nor wise.
Suddenly the Obama Administration seemed wobbly on the Middle East; clearly, Clinton had been too bullish on
Netanyahu's proposal (which had been negotiated over months with Middle East envoy George Mitchell and was seen,
privately, by the Americans as real progress). But the Administration's mission was to get the parties into peace talks
without preconditions. The Israelis were now in favor of talks. The Palestinians were setting preconditions. And Clinton
had violated an essential rule of her job: boring is almost always better.(See photos from the life and career of former
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright.)
Clinton's Three Qualities
For the past 40 years, the awkward Middle East press conference has helped define the job of Secretary of State. You go
to Jerusalem or Ramallah; you stand there ""guardedly optimistic"" in public; in private, you try to move a comma, but the
Israelis or Palestinians move, a semicolon to block your comma. The result is almost always the same: gridlock. The
breakthroughs, when they come, emanate from others. Walter Cronkite asks Anwar Sadat if he'd be willing to go to
Jerusalem ... and Sadat, to everyone's surprise, says yes. The Israelis and Palestinians hold secret meetings in Oslo and
reach what appears to be a breakthrough — they're talking! — which then becomes another dead end.
The job of Secretary of State is more thankless than glamorous; in some ways, the Department of State, a noble antique,
is still trying to come to terms with the invention of the telephone. In an era when Twitter haiku-messaging rules,
diplomacy moves at the speed, and requires the nuanced complexity, of literature. Power has drifted from State to the
National Security Council and the Pentagon, especially in wartime. Only a few of Clinton's recent predecessors have
distinguished themselves. Henry Kissinger, a National Security Adviser who belatedly became Secretary of State, was
Richard Nixon's schizophrenic alter ego; George Shultz was a strong policy voice in the Reagan Administration; James
Baker had clout because he was George H.W. Bush's best friend and a world-class dealmaker. Most of the others have
been frustrated or forgettable. And yet this is Hillary Clinton we're talking about — the second most popular American in
the world, an eternally compelling and supremely talented character, the subject of constant speculation, a walking
headline. Her very presence in the job makes it crucial once more.
It is a cliché to say that by naming Clinton, Obama brought his most popular potential opponent into the tent. The
conventional wisdom, too cynical by half, is that he thereby succeeded in neutering her, a theory bolstered by Clinton's
reticence during her first nine months on the job, with special envoys like Mitchell and Richard Holbrooke doing the
heavy lifting of diplomacy. But by naming Clinton, Obama also gave her great power, which cuts both ways: if she
becomes dissatisfied with her role or the Administration's policies, she can become a torpedo aimed at the Oval Office.
Colin Powell had similar power and a real gripe — the Iraq war — but never used it. Clinton has no such gripe, but as the
Obama Administration settles in and policy differences begin to emerge among the key players, the Powell conundrum
looms: How will Clinton choose to use her power? How will Obama react if and when she does?
Traditionally, the Secretary of State is judged on his or her ability to formulate policy, negotiate deals and manage the
striped-pants bureaucracy. Clinton has no history as a global strategist, although her performance in the 2008 campaign
indicates that she is a bit more conservative than the President, more the foreign policy realist than the Wilsonian
idealist. It is also too early to judge her skill as a manager or negotiator — although her performance in Jerusalem
indicates that she needs a few lessons in Middle East Haggling 101.
There are, however, three qualities that could make her a memorable Secretary of State. She brings a vision of
departmental reform — the need to elevate foreign aid programs to the same status and rigorous scrutiny as diplomacy
— that could change striped pants into chinos in the developing world. She is also the first elected politician to hold the
office since Edmund Muskie briefly did during the Carter Administration, which has enabled her to better understand
and interact with the politicians who run places like Afghanistan and Pakistan. But most important, she is an
international celebrity with a much higher profile than any of her recent predecessors and the ability — second only to
the President's — to change negative attitudes about the U.S. abroad.
She has the potential to become the most powerful public diplomat the U.S. has fielded in quite some time, although
her performance so far, at home and abroad, has occasionally been perplexing. At home, she has often seemed
tentative and deferential. In a conversation with Secretary of Defense Robert Gates aired by CNN in early October,
Clinton's cautious formality took a backseat to Gates' brisk, humorous confidence on policy issues. Abroad, she seems
far more confident, at times to the point of recklessness, as in Jerusalem. (See photos of the last days of Hillary Clinton's
campaign.)
Independence and Candor
In the last week of October, Secretary Clinton moved squarely to the center of the world stage, attempting, at the
behest of her special envoys, to improve the rocky alliance with Pakistan and nudge the Middle East pugilists into talks.
In the course of the trip, there were the first stray wisps of a hint that Clinton wanted to begin asserting her
independence, as the Administration, facing roadblocks across the world, struggled for a firmer foreign policy tone after
an opening nine months that might be called the Rodney King — ""Can't we all just get along?"" — phase.
During her three days in Pakistan, she ran a gauntlet of town-hall meetings and media interviews that may have been
unprecedented, to use the word of the week, for a U.S. Secretary of State. The trip, planned by Holbrooke and Pakistan
specialist Vali Nasr, offered an unusually subtle itinerary for a U.S. diplomatic mission. A visit to a Sufi mosque that had
been bombed by Sunni extremists, for example, sent a powerful message to Pakistan's moderate Islamic majority. ""We
saw her praying there,"" an academic named Shala Aziz told me, ""and, for the first time, I'm thinking, The Americans have
hearts.""(See photos of the suicide bombings in Islamabad.)
The big news was that Clinton allowed herself to be hammered with hostile questions from students, talk-show hosts
and Pashturi elders -- and that, on occasion, she pushed back, raising incredibly sensitive issues, like why no one in the
Pakistani government knew where Osama bin Laden was, even though he had been in the country since 2002. Press
accounts either emphasized the embarrassment of a Secretary of State's getting pummeled or fixed on Clinton's
undiplomatic bluntness. But they missed the point: her candor, her willingness to listen to and acknowledge criticism,
had begun to undermine the prevailing Pakistani image of the U.S. as arrogant and bossy, more interested in having the
Pakistani military fight its war against al-Qaeda and the Taliban than in having a true strategic partnership. The contrast
was especially sharp after George W. Bush's eight years of unqualified support for the military dictatorship of Pervez
Musharraf. ""In the past, when the Americans came, they would talk to the generals and go home,"" said Farahnaz
Ispahani, a government spokeswoman and Member of Parliament. ""Clinton's willingness to meet with everyone, hostile
or not, has made a big impression — and because she's Hillary Clinton, with a real history of affinity for this country, it
means so much more.""
Transformative Experience
There are no toasts at state dinners in Pakistan, because there is no alcohol. There are opening statements, though, and
Clinton's — delivered impromptu on the first night of her trip after tossing aside her notes — was surprisingly emotional.
Earlier in the day, President Asif Ali Zardari, the widower of Benazir Bhutto, had presented the Secretary with an album
of photos from her first visit to Pakistan, in 1995, and a framed photo of Bhutto and her two sons with Clinton and
daughter Chelsea. ""It did bring tears to my eyes,"" Clinton said at the state dinner in her honor at the presidential palace,
""because I so admired your wife. She gave her life ..."" She faltered then, choking up, but quickly pulled herself together,
talking about the ""reasons why we do what we do — to provide opportunities for all.""
Clinton's first trip to Pakistan as First Lady in 1995 had been a transformative experience for her — the beginning, I
believe, of the•process that made her a plausible candidate for Secretary of State. I traveled with her on that trip; when
we set off, she seemed depressed and even more private than usual. The Democrats had cratered in the 1994
congressional elections, and she had been trounced in her efforts to enact a universal health care plan. It was a very
personal defeat; as Clinton traveled the country trying to sell the plan, crowds shouted her down and cursed her.
Privately she admitted she was shocked by the hatred. The trip to South Asia seemed a bit of a vacation — it was
Chelsea's spring break — but also a retreat to a more demure, First Lady–like role after two years as health care policy
czar, although it proceeded in a decidedly wonky, Hillarian fashion. Jackie Kennedy had gone to India and famously
ridden an elephant; Hillary Clinton traveled to five countries and packed her schedule with visits to NGOs.
""That was the greatest trip, just unbelievable,"" Clinton says now. We were sitting in her hotel suite the day after her
Jerusalem gaffe, the Secretary in an electric-blue shift rather than her usual formal jacket and pants. She was wearing
glasses and appeared rather freckly without her makeup. ""I guess that trip has animated and informed everything I've
done since,"" she said. She emerged from the trip reinvigorated, with a new mission. By the end of 1995, at the U.N.
Conference on Women in Beijing, the First Lady had propounded a new Clinton Doctrine: ""Women's rights are human
rights.""(See photos of Beijing's changing skyline.)
Clinton is not an easy interview. She is preternaturally cautious, a consequence of her Methodist propriety and 20 years
of insane public scrutiny. She does not like to talk about herself, but she did tell me one interesting story about Bhutto.
When her husband was governor of Arkansas, she and Bill and Chelsea visited London and stood on the sidewalk outside
Bhutto's hotel, waiting for the then Pakistani Prime Minister to arrive. ""She was wearing a yellow embroidered shalwar
kameez with a chiffon scarf. I was just a fan, standing on the sidewalk with everyone else. It was the only time I ever did
anything like that,"" Clinton says.
When Clinton and Bhutto met formally, on the first day of the 1995 trip, they hit it off immediately, in part because
Bhutto was also obsessed with the impact the Islamist tide was having on women and children. I remember asking
Bhutto that day what the biggest change in her country had been over the past 25 years, and she said, ""I used to be able
to walk down the street wearing jeans, without a headscarf. Now I can't."" When I asked her why, she said — bluntly —
""The Saudis,"" who had been aggressively funding religious schools. Of course, Bhutto's acquiescence to, and
participation in, the general corruption of the Pakistani government was part of the reason public schools were so
inadequate and madrasahs became popular. (See photos from the aftermath of Benazir Bhutto's assassination in 2007.)
Ironically, the rise of Sunni extremist groups like al-Qaeda has brought Clinton's interests — microfinance, education and
health care — to the center of national-security policy for the first time. The impetus came not from the State
Department but from the military, where counterinsurgency doctrine demanded that social services in war zones -
schools, justice, economic development — reinforce the military's efforts to secure the population. As a result, there
was immediate chemistry between Clinton and General David Petraeus, author of the Army's counterinsurgency
manual, who became one of her prime military mentors when she served on the Senate Armed Services Committee. At
one point, well before Obama made his presidential intentions known, I asked Petraeus if there was any potential
Democratic candidate who understood how his mind worked, and he said, ""You mean, aside from Hillary?""
It was Clinton who brought together Petraeus and Holbrooke (""my two alpha males,"" she calls them) for the first time -
at her home in Washington on the Friday before the Obama Inauguration. The affection and respect she gained for the
military while serving in the Senate has helped make the relationship between State and the Pentagon less fraught than
usual — although Defense Secretary Gates' insistence on the need for bigger State Department budgets hasn't hurt. In
fact, relations with the Pentagon have gone smoother, at times, than Clinton's relationship with the White House staff.
Clinton was particularly irritated by the ridiculously strict vetting process that thwarted her favored candidate for USAID
director, Paul Farmer, from getting the job. ""It was all sorts of niggling things,"" says a Clinton adviser, ""like, Farmer had
at one point brought more than $10,000 in cash into Haiti. The money was for a needle-exchange program, but the
amount was illegal.""
Another of Clinton's military mentors, retired General Jack Keane, once told me, ""I'm a Republican. I disagree with her
about practically everything, but she'd make a hell of a Commander in Chief."" There is a palpable toughness to the
woman, a hard edge that contrasts with the President's instinctive impulse toward conciliation. One of the sharpest
exchanges of the presidential campaign came when Obama accused Clinton of echoing the ""bluster"" of George W. Bush
after she said the U.S. would be able to ""obliterate"" Iran if it used nuclear weapons against Israel. Clinton's edgier tone
has been evident from the start of the Administration: she took a sharper position than the President on an Israeli
settlement freeze by claiming, in May, that Obama wanted ""to see a stop to settlements. Not some settlements, not
outposts, not natural-growth exceptions."" And then, in Jerusalem, her use of the word unprecedented seemed a
rhetorical leap beyond the No Drama ground rules.(Read ""Clinton's Collateral Damage."")
The White House was not entirely thrilled with either statement. But then the White House staff is several steps
removed from a negotiating process. The Palestinians are weak and divided. The Israelis have been difficult, as always:
whenever Mitchell raises East Jerusalem in talks with the Israeli Foreign Minister, the Israeli stands up and walks out of
the room. Despite Netanyahu's momentary, tactical enthusiasm for peace talks, his Likud Party has always favored the
de facto incorporation of Palestinian lands into the state of Israel.
Hillary's Choice
The tensions between the White House and State raise a fascinating question going forward. Obama and Clinton are in
substantive agreement on the President's diplomacy-first philosophy and on most policy issues — although neither is
willing to disclose the content of their private conversations — but style often predicts substance in foreign policy;
neither Obama's gauziness nor Clinton's inconsistent bluntness overseas seems particularly solid. There is a growing
perception that the Administration's policies have been thwarted across the board: Afghanistan is a mess, Iran seems
ready to scuttle the nuclear negotiations, there's no progress in the Middle East, the Syrians and North Koreans remain
recalcitrant, the Russians have been offered a freebie on missile defense, and the Chinese have been given a pass on
human rights with no apparent quid pro quos.
The White House argues that some progress has been made: Iran is on the defensive, and North Korea has said it will
return to the six-party talks. Clinton argues, correctly, about the need for ""strategic patience."" But the only thing Obama
really has to show for his efforts so far is a Nobel Prize for Potential and — no small thing — the wisdom to have
refrained from doing anything so wildly stupid as invading Iraq. The President has been willing to use military force -
the Predator drones that have decimated al-Qaeda's leadership testify to his lack of squeamishness — but this
Administration is supposed to be about the efficacy of using subtler expressions of.U.S. power. That doesn't happen
overnight, but for Obama's policies to be considered a success, it has to happen sooner or later, in a way that can be
explained to the public.
There is also a growing sense that the President's inexperience is beginning to show — not in his overall policy, which
represents the views of a broad, moderate national-security consensus ranging from Brent Scowcroft to John Kerry, but
in his execution of the details. The Afghan strategy review has been too public and taken too long; the Middle East peace
hunt has become a wild goose chase. A letter to Iran's Supreme Leader is a productive gesture only if it gets a response;
if it doesn't, it seems weak and supplicatory. A call for the Israelis to freeze settlements is effective only if it is
accompanied by the credible threat of a reduction in aid. ""You can't be seen pushing countries around — demanding
[that] Israel freeze settlements, demanding that Hamid Karzai reform his government — and not get results,"" says Leslie
H. Gelb, author of Power Rules. ""The leaders of these countries are tough, successful politicians, and they'll begin to take
you less seriously."" (See photos from the 1979 revolution in Iran.)
Clinton is unwilling to acknowledge these problems, and her staff is loath to admit her occasional mistakes. Her praise
for the President is fulsome, and aides say the relationship with Obama really — really — is strong. But there are also
burblings and emanations from Clinton's staff and friends, Foggy Bottom body language, that suggest there is a need for
the Administration to produce a second act after the Rodney King phase. And the White House is perplexed by the
uncharacteristic lack of discipline indicated by Clinton's occasional overseas gaffes.
These tensions are well within the boundaries of normal, creative policymaking. There is absolutely no indication that
the Secretary is frustrated to the point of jumping ship — or returning to politics as a candidate for governor of New
York, as has been rumored. Quite the contrary, she seems intent on making history as Secretary of State. To do that,
though, she will have to have the same authority at home as she has abroad. She will have to become the President's
primary foreign policy voice. Over the first nine months of the Obama Administration, seven different Obama officials
have spoken on the Sunday talk shows about foreign policy. Clinton has been on each of the Sunday shows once. ""Either
you have one person sending the foreign policy message, with the clear approval of the President,"" says a former
Republican Secretary of State, ""or there is no message.""(See photos from eight months of Obama's diplomacy.)
Aides to Obama say they would like to see her on the Sunday shows more often. (Indeed, Clinton's staff acknowledged
that she was asked to appear two additional times but was traveling and unable to do so.) Ultimately, though, television
is a metaphor for the larger questions that need to be resolved: How much can these former rivals — both extremely
guarded and private people — really trust each other; and, if not Clinton, who will emerge as the President's alter ego
on foreign policy? At this point, the strongest member of Obama's national-security team is Gates — but he's a
Republican and an unlikely spokesman or presidential confidant on anything beyond Pentagon issues. General Jim Jones
has settled in as National Security Adviser, but he's not a political animal — and every President needs a close foreign
policy adviser who understands the intersection of long-term strategy, politics and diplomatic chess.
Clinton's value to the Administration was clear in Pakistan. She wowed a public so skeptical that it had been questioning
the $7.5 billion in purely economic and humanitarian aid the Administration had promised. ""How much damage control
have you been able to do on this trip?"" asked Meher Bokhari, a television-news-show host, at the end of Clinton's
meeting with Pakistani women. The Secretary seemed nonplussed by the bluntness of the question. ""I don't know,"" she
said. ""I hope some.""
Afterward, I asked Bokhari to answer her own question. ""Well, this trip was long overdue,"" she said. ""The Pakistani
people really needed to talk to an American about our concerns — the strings attached to aid programs, the drone
attacks, their history of support for the military dictatorship. And it needs to be followed up. But if you ask me about the
damage control"" — she paused, thinking it through — ""I'd have to say a lot. She accomplished a lot.""
In the end, though, Clinton's success will be determined by whether she can expand her role beyond public diplomat.
She will have to become a more sure-handed negotiator and, most important, a trusted adviser to a President who
knows where he wants to go in the world but hasn't quite figured out how to get there."
170;Yes
170;"PIR <preines
Thursday, November 5, 2009 7:09 AM
H; millscd@state.gov; balderstonkm@state.gov; toivnf@state.gov; crowleypj@state.gov
Re: Ed Luce article
At Boeing in Moscow, Jake and I sold Janine Zacharia of Bloomberg on looking at your Commercial Diplomacy efforts -
and this is one of the things she's basing it on. So we should be seeing that in the next weeks, and I think it will trigger
other US press to follow, or at least absorb. That's our hope and plan anyway.
On 11/5/09, H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
> Great article. Thx to all. I'm copying RI and Philippe to see if they
> can it into US press coverage of us and our efforts.
>"
170;"WASHINGTON (CNN) — Fewer than three in 10 Americans think Sarah Palin's qualified to be president, according to a
new national poll - the least of any of the five potential candidates included in the survey.
But another woman tops that list in the CNN/Opinion Research Corporation survey released Monday: two-thirds of the
public thinks that Secretary of State Hillary Clinton's qualified for the Oval Office. That's more than Vice President Joe
Biden, who's currently next in line for the presidency.
According to the poll, 28 percent of Americans say Palin is qualified to run the White House, with seven in 10 saying the
former Alaska governor and 2008 Republican vice presidential nominee is not qualified.
The survey indicates that a majority of Republicans, 54 percent, feel Palin is qualified, with 44 percent indicating she
isn't. But only 29 percent of independent voters questioned feel she is qualified to serve as president, with 68 percent
disagreeing. According to the poll, nine in 10 Democrats feel Palin is not qualified.
The poll's release comes one day before the release of Palin's book, ""Going Rogue: An American Life.""
""The perception that Palin is not qualified to be president puts her significantly behind two potential rivals for the GOP
nomination in 2012 - Mitt Romney and Mike Huckabee,"" says CNN Polling Director Keating Holland.
According to the survey, nearly half of all Americans think Romney is qualified to be president, with 43 percent feeling
the same way about Huckabee. Among Republicans, Palin is still lagging other potential 2012 primary candidates: 63
percent of GOPers think that Romney and Huckabee are qualified, 9 points higher than the number that say the same of
Palin.""
Palin has many strengths - recent CNN polls indicate that Americans believe that she is not a typical politician, that she
cares about average Americans, and that she is honest and trustworthy,"" says Holland. ""But the perception that she is
not qualified for the White House is her biggest Achilles heel.""An ABC News/Washington Post poll also released Monday
indicates that 38 percent of Americans say Palin's qualified to serve as president, with six in 10 saying she's not qualified.
The CNN survey indicates that 67 percent of people questioned say that Clinton is qualified to serve in the Oval Office,
17 points higher than the 50 percent of Americans who think that Biden's qualified to take over as president.Biden's low
number may be attributable to negative feelings about the Obama/Biden administration rather than views of Biden
personally.""
In the past, poll respondents who dislike an administration have sometimes taken it out on the vice president,"" say
Holland. Polls from the late 1990s showed that Americans felt Al Gore was qualified to be president, but only if
respondents were given the chance to say something negative about Gore that was unrelated to his qualifications, he
adds. In the Bush administration, the number who thought Dick Cheney was qualified to be president dropped as the
administration grew more unpopular. ""Cheney's experience in office didn't change during that period - attitudes toward
the Bush/Cheney administration did,"" he says.
Hillary Clinton also has the advantage of having been able to stay out of domestic policy debates, including health care,
the economic stimulus, and other controversial matters, while adding almost daily to her experience in foreign policy,
Holland adds, while Biden has been involved in the domestic policy disputes - ""which might explain why some
respondents were looking for a reason to say something negative about the veep.""
The CNN/Opinion Research Corporation poll was conducted November 13-15, with 1,014 adult Americans questioned by
telephone. The survey's sampling error is plus or minus 3 percentage points for the overall sample."
170;You can't email Huma when she's in the same room, I set it to be loud & grating when you do!
170;"ill Ex-Gates Foundation exec named foreign aid chief
Obama administration picks former Gates Foundation official to run US foreign aid
By MATTHEW LEE
Associated Press
ij 11-10-2009 13:46
11 SINGAPORE (AP) _ The Obama administration will nominate a young former executive with the Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation to run America's top foreign assistance program, ending months of speculation
and complaints about who would take the vacant post, U.S. officials said Tuesday.
$ President Barack Obama has chosen Rajiv Shah, a medical doctor and currently a senior official at the
Department of Agriculture dealing with food security, to run the U.S. Agency for International
Development, the officials said.
¶ The officials spoke on condition of anonymity pending notification to Congress and a formal public
announcement of the choice.
11 Shah's selection, which must still be confirmed by the Senate, would end a 10-month leadership
vacuum at USAID, which has been operating with an acting director since Obama took office despite his
campaign pledges to have the agency play a greater role in foreign policy.
11 Obama and Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton have said USAID is crucial to deploying their
preferred ""smart power"" foreign policy strategy, which envisions more equal roles for diplomacy and
development alongside defense. They plan to double the amount of foreign aid.
11 The agency will play a key role in the administration's efforts in Afghanistan and Pakistan, where
officials believe the civilian component must be strengthened.
$ But the top job at the agency has remained vacant until now, with several prime candidates'
withdrawing from consideration amid a White House vetting process that Clinton denounced in July as
""ridiculous,"" ""a nightmare,"" and ""frustrating beyond words.""
$ Shah, 36, whose family immigrated to the U.S. from India, is now the Under Secretary for Research,
Education and Economics and Chief Scientist at the Agriculture Department where he manages a budget
of more than $2.6 billion and more than 10,000 staff around the world.
¶ Before that, he had several positions at the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, including managing its
$1.5 billion contribution to a global vaccination fund and helping launch the foundation's Global
Development program where he oversaw a $1.3 billion investment portfolio.
The lingering USAID vacancy, particularly after several leading candidates pulled out, had upset
development experts and Congress. Some lawmakers had suggested that Obama choose someone who
had already gone through the vetting process.
¶ Shah fits that bill and has important political credentials, having worked with or for several leading
Democratic politicians.
il"
170;"Was just scanning now. All I'm finding are wire headlines on the coffee.
Looking to see if your KSM answer - specifically, ""I'm not going to second guess - is taken as less than full throated"
170;"There is a famous American movie called Field of Dreams, and in it, the hero - Kevin Costner - builds a baseball field at
his remote farm, he carves it out of his crop. Some people don't think what he's doing makes sense, they think it's a risk
- but he is a true baseball fanatic and he loves the game and he takes on the project because he keeps hearing...
""If you build it., they will come...
If you build it, they will come.""
Well ladies and gentlemen, I am proud to say that we built it, and we care coming to the Shanghai World Expo"
170;"I'm checking with one person, but no further Intel on my end yet
But don't think Mark's writing, just fishing - unless the WH gave it to the Times, but there's no way they'd handle you
that way
Let me confirm that point, which is important to know"
170;They are trying to report this out, but not writing imminently
170;"I went back upstairs with Dr Kissinger and we talked about it. I regret the seating, it just begged Meacham to interview
you, to ask a question, then alternate answering. Was just a very different dynamic than you two before the sitdown. It
would be bad TV. But it's print.
So as an observer, and I think this will come across to the reader, it was a fascinating meeting of two eras that are very
different but very the same. Two very different people, but the same job, experiencing it much the same way. His spiel
at the end about the goal should be more than ending the war will translate well.
And most importantly, the photos look great
He was also a sport and called my friend and talked for 10 mins about non-proliferation"
170;"I didn't - but hard to believe he did. I was pretty surprised myself when I read the piece.
Just shows you that it's near impossible to take issue with the job you're doing it, which is why the political reporters
have to resort to the manufactured drama of interactions with the WH.
Face was good. Perfect in that it generated no issues to clean up, but other networks picked up clips re Iran.
Gates's remark that he couldn't send any new troops before January to Afghanistan seems to be the only thing
approaching news.
I saw WJC on Meet (VERY good, and a lot about CGI's work re women and girls), but I missed Paterson!"
170;"Reines, Philippe I <reinesp@state.gov>
Thursday, December 17, 2009 5:39 AM
H
Abedin, Huma
Valmoro"
170;"PIR <
Monday, January 25, 2010 8:54 AM
Jake Sullivan; Huma Abedin; CDM
Montreal Travelers
Half old half new faces on the plane today:
AP/Bob Burns
Reuters/Arshad
AFP/Christophe Schmidt
WP/Glenn Kessler (1st time since India)
NPR/Michele Kelleman
Ed Luce( Financial Times)
April Ryan (American Urban Radio
Ray Boone (Richmond Free Press)
Dewayne Wickham (USA Today)
Tom Jonud (Esquire Magazine)"
170;"Photo is gorgeous (and there are 20 more online, some are really great)
The article is good, just way too short, so it became very matter of fact, didn't include a lot of the great stuff he saw that
day. They cut what he turned in in half.
But for this readership, that length is probably perfect. It supposedly gets seen by 70 million people. 69 million
probably never open it up and just see it in their Sunday paper, so the cover is the ballgame. Story is basically an excuse
for the cover. And the cover is a homerun.
In the end, I firmly believe it will be the totality all these in-depth projects like Vogue, National Geographic, Nightline,
Time - which I know are annoying - that are going to create a collage documenting your success, especially in terms of
style and work ethic, which I believe is what people are most interested when it comes to their perception and approval
of you."
170;"She's sorta right. We post as much video as we can, and bat 1.000 on domestic events. Tougher on overseas events
since we don't have the resources abroad with us that we have here at home. We held a meeting with the web &
broadcasting folks today to talk about this, and came up with a few ways to bolster our road video.
But generally speaking, it's a huge priority for us all to post video whenever possible."
170;Yes, will connect with Jake now on remarks as prepared
170;"Editorial: Mrs. Clinton in Pakistan
NEW YORK TIMES
October 30, 2009
Hillary Rodham Clinton's first trip to Pakistan as secretary of state was never going to be easy. The day she arrived,
extremists detonated a car bomb at a crowded market in Peshawar that killed at least 100 people. The Nation
newspaper dismissed the visit as a mere ""PR exercise, but who will buy what the US is selling is difficult to imagine,
beyond the already compliant government.""
Polls show that an overwhelming majority of Pakistanis dislike and mistrust the United States. They blame Washington
for using and then abandoning them after the Soviets were driven from Afghanistan. And they resent Washington for
pressing their government now to fight against extremists — and suspect that they will be abandoned again. The fact
that many of the extremists are on Pakistan's territory and threatening Pakistan's government has not shifted that
thinking or mitigated that resentment.
A good part of this, of course, is the failure of Pakistan's government, which has still not adequately explained that this is
not just America's fight. But the United States is also to blame. For eight years the Bush administration coddled the
Pakistani Army at the expense of the rest of society.
Mrs. Clinton challenged Pakistan's government to do more to shut down Al Qaeda, but she was, rightly, determined to
use this visit to also broaden the relationship.
Instead of just courting President Asif All Zardari and the army chief, Gen. Ashfaq Parvez Kayani, Mrs. Clinton also held
talks with the top opposition leader, Nawaz Sharif; parried questions from an audience of deeply suspicious college
students; met with civil society leaders, including women and Pashtun elders; gave interviews to Pakistani journalists;
and visited religious and cultural sights.
She promised to refocus American aid on the ""needs of the people"" and announced targeted commitments, including
$85 million for microloans for poor women to start businesses and $125 million for the first phase of an electricity
project aimed at reducing blackouts and improving energy conservation.
Those grants are welcome but still small change when compared with a five-year, $7.5 billion — nonmilitary — aid
package approved by Congress and signed into law this year. That package was supposed to demonstrate to Pakistanis
that, this time, the United States is in it for the long haul. Instead, it has become another focus of popular resentment.
The Army and some Pakistani news media whipped that up with disingenuous complaints that the legislation (Islamabad
was consulted beforehand) compromised Pakistan's sovereignty by conditioning disbursement on adequate civilian
control of the military.
If Washington is ever to enlist Pakistan as a reliable ally, it is going to have to do a much better job of explaining itself.
And it is going to have to insist that Pakistan's leaders start explaining the real stakes to their citizens and the real
benefits of an alliance with the United States. Mrs. Clinton's trip was an important start — but only a start."
170;"Today's Dallas Morning News editorial page condemns attorney David Schiller for including you in the wrongful death
suit that he filed on behalf of the Lozado family. It ends with ""... citing Clinton is enough to give even ambulance-
chasing lawyers a bad name."""
170;CDM & Raj live on CNN (ch 14)
170;Ok, he's definitely keeping a very open mind Seeing him at 10:30am to suggest a few little things as baby steps
170;"PIR <preines(
Wednesday, March 17, 2010 12:59 AM
Huma Abedin
Steinberg Project: First (Baby) Step
http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2010/03/when-a-schedule-is-more-than-a-schedule/37587/
When A Schedule Is More Than A Schedule
By Marc Am binder
The Atlantic.com
Mar 16 2010, 9:45 PM ET
Close observers of the State Department noticed something different this afternoon: on the daily schedule distributed
by the department includes, for the first time, information on Deputy Secretary of State Jim Steinberg's appointments.
Until recently, the daily release included Secretary of State Hillary Clinton's schedule only. No longer.
""Steinberg will meet Wednesday with Singaporean Deputy Prime Minister Teo Chee Hean.""
The inclusion of Steinberg suggests that the department is aware that it needs to do a better job of integrating
Steinberg's portfolio into its general communications strategy and show how the leadership of the department acts in
concert.
""Jim has always been an integral part of the Secretary's team, but we haven't always shown how crucial he is to State's
mission,"" said Philippe Reines, Clinton's communications consiglieri. ""This is a one simple way to fix that.""
The Beltway rumor mill often includes gossip that Steinberg isn't happy, or that he's not seen as an integral part of
President Obama's foreign policy team, or that his efforts aren't appreciated.
Reines, who rarely speaks on the record, responded to a question about whether Steinberg is indeed unhappy in this
way: ""I'm not a shrink, and I have to confess that we don't sit around in a circle often enough exploring our feelings. But
what is crystal clear to everyone is that Jim is smart, dedicated, and valued.""
Steinberg has a been a principal adviser on issues ranging from Iran -- he is the administration's team lead, cybersecurity
and China (he's been tasked with pressuring China into accepting tougher sanctions on Iran), but his work often goes
unnoticed.
On Friday, he is said to have given a tongue-lashing to the Israeli Ambassador to the U.S., Michael Oren, about that
country's actions during a visit by Vice President Biden.
When President Obama selected Gen. Jim Jones as National Security Adviser, he asked Clinton to make Steinberg her
deputy -- and she did. Since day one, prognosticators have been predicting friction between Steinberg and Clinton,
although none has publicly surfaced."
170;"Time Magazine is including Nancy Pelosi in their 100 Issue, and as you know from writing for others and being written
about, they ask other notables to write the accompanying text. They are inviting you to write the text that accompanies
Pelosi's
We all think you should do, the timing allows you to write a bit about the importance of health care."
170;"PIR <preines
Saturday, March 6, 2010 10:50 AM
H
Huma Abedin
Reminder: WaPo Call re Bob Barnett
Gentle reminder about the Bob Barnett profile he emailed you about. Story is being written by David Montgomery of the
Washington Post, and is slated to run tomorrow - so we need to do this today, the earlier the better.
All you have to do is call into Ops when you're ready, they will connect you to the reporter (and add me in)
Here's the reporters description on the piece: ""...a large profile of Bob Barnett for the Style section. I know Barnett has
been a friend and counselor and campaign supporter over the years. I would like to ask Secretary Clinton her estimation
of what makes Barnett good at what he does, what he has meant to her in the various ways he has worked for her over
the years. And I would like to ask what she makes of how such a committed Democrat as Barnett is able to work so well
in his professional life for noted Republicans on book projects and other work. (A theme of the piece is how some say
Barnett harkens to a mythic time in Washington when players supposedly could more readily have relationships with
other side, even while sticking to principles in their political work)""
You have talked about Bob many times, but general points:
B5"
170;"Wow, that was fast - and great
Don't worry about the reporter reading the quotes back to you, we're recording and he'll have the transcript shortly. I'm
guessing we just caught him at a bad moment and he's not as flaky as he sounds"
170;"Yes - was more than ok
And you've read my mind, will make sure he sees"
170;Ok
170;Yes, joint w/WJC, Huma should have for your review
170;"Really good stuff. Especially fantastic opening page
Getting very very good feedback
I can't even remember now what if anything in it bugged me yesterday. Nothing in it has anyone making a double take
to flesh out so far.
Its overall frame of the partnership paints you in exactly the way I think people respect you most, and I think Hirsh might
actually have come up with a theme that will stick.
Have only seen the cover photo online, I want to see the hardcopy since we all know it's the pictures that really matter.
Text on the cover is great"
170;"You're very welcome. We've got a pretty good process in place handling the projects, and as always, we have a great
product to sell.
And as a non-Methodist list maker, this project now comes off mine, and Caroline will be crossing it off our white board
tomorrow, a very satisfying ritual. Esquire's should hit soon and will hopefully be as positive. Then it's just 60 left, and I
feel good about that too.
I would say that the one thing that's going to continue to be annoying is people pressing you on how long you'll serve.
When Tavis got you to say you probably won't for 8 years, that was especially stupid newsmaking on his part. Hirsh tried
it with four, and I think others will.
Might just be easiest to say, I've learned not to predict the future - including my own - but I intend to and hope to. We
have a lot to do, so much that we've started, and I want to see it through.
Or just a simple I hope to
If you don't you don't nobody's going to call you on saying you 'intended to' a year earlier. Again, the 8 years was
especially dumb speculation
But these questions are really code for are you happy, are you being treated well, do you have enough juice? And no
point to let people interpret the answer to their nefarious use."
170;"PIR <preines( _
Sunday, April 25, 2010 10:36 AM
H .
Re: Newsweek"
170;"PIR <preines
Monday, April 26, 2010 9:52 PM
Re: Nice picture!
Today's to do list read:
1) Remove all copies of Post from 7th floor
2) Prevent item from appearing in clips
3) Avoid HRC at all costs, provide no opportunity for ribbing
As you can see I went 0 for 3"
170;"PIR <preines■
Friday, April 30, 2010 6:14 PM
H
Re: Oil spill
I'm not
For a few reasons
First, calmness is not such a bad thing in these moments. Calm is not cavalier, which you weren't
Second, you're not the EPA administrator or Interior Secretary - nobody will see you as a front line cabinet officer on this
Third, if this is still out of control on Sunday, the administration has bigger problems
So I'm really not worried.
Here it is again which might allay your concerns
SECRETARY CLINTON: Well, David, I think that the President has ordered the departments that deal with this —
Homeland Security, Interior, Environmental Protection, Defense — to all immediately not only do everything possible to
mitigate the effects of this spill, but to try to come up with recommendations going forward. The first order of business,
however, is to try to get this spill under control, which has been, as you know, very difficult, and to prevent further
damage to the coastline along Louisiana to the fishing waters, to the wildlife. I think it does raise questions which the
President has said have to be answered. He put forth a very comprehensive approach that included the potential of
drilling off of our own shores. That is a national security concern because we have to do better to lessen our
dependence on foreign oil. But it has to be done safely. It can't be done at the risk of having to spend billions of dollars
cleaning up these spills. So as with so much in these difficult areas, it's going to require a balancing act."
170;That was great, thank you for doing
170;"Just the stuff from yesterday. Maybe one of the cable nets or talking heads made a to do about it.
But I'm surprised because it didn't seem anyone here cared, was all Canada"
170;"He asked you about this when you sat down. The press hangs in the Andrews DV lounge and gets on the plane well
before you, the Air Force must have had Fox on when he was with us."
170;"I don't know, people make big deals out of nothing, rather than subscribe to Occam's Razor
I have to look it up but I think you said you never noticed, probably because it's when you're not on the plane
I'll double check"
170;"Not sure - but this is a good excuse to bring him in for an OTR with you. Lona mentioned you wanted to see Tom
Friedman - with your ok, we could schedule both (separately) over the next month or so
I'd very much like to get back in the habit of bringing someone or a small group in every few weeks."
170;"PIR <preines(
Wednesday, February 10, 2010 1:16 PM
CDM; Huma Abedin; Jake Sullivan
FLOTUS re XFLOTUS
From Larry King last night:
LARRY KING: How is the -- it was so bitter -- well, rather bitter in the campaign with Hillary, when they were going at
each other.
MICHELLE OBAMA: Yes, it seems so long ago.
KING: Yes. How are they doing now together?
OBAMA: They're great. Hillary Clinton is an amazing secretary of State. I mean she would have been an amazing
president. She was an amazing attorney. She's a phenomenal professional. And she's proven to be a tremendous asset in
-- in so many ways. So the relationship is -- is -- is strong. They share the same views in terms of international policy and
approach. And we're seeing the outcome of that on the international stage. I think, you know, we can say pretty clearly
that the United States -- the -- the view of this nation around the world has changed. People are enthusiastic about the
potential. Things aren't perfect. We're still a nation fighting two wars. But when we travel around the country, the
excitement and the possibility are palpable. And I think that's because of the president, but I think it's also because of
our secretary of State.
http://transcripts.cnn.com/TRANSCRIPTS/1002/09/1k1.01.html"
170;"Just FYI on the below, from one of those crazy right ""magazines"" - notes that the home you referenced in your Prayer
Breakfast remarks has since closed.
I checked in with Lissa & Melanne, they didn't know it closed, which makes sense since it happened in 2002 after you left
the White House.
I made it clear that your longtime commitment to this issue - throughout your public career - is well known, and you
remain very proud of your work with Mother Teresa in opening this home in 1995. And that your partnership is a
success story to be emulated.
Again, this is just FYI
http://www.worldmag.com/webextra/16398
ADOPTION I Hillary Clinton continues to hail an adoption home she helped open with Mother Teresa that has since
closed its doors By Emily Belz
WASHINGTON—An adoption ministry Secretary of State Hillary Clinton hailed as a home she helped open with Mother
Teresa no longer handles adoptions and its phone line has been disconnected, though at last week's National Prayer
Breakfast Clinton spent five minutes of her 30-minute speech relating the story of its opening. Last Thursday Clinton
described Mother Teresa ""beaming about what this meant for children and their futures,"" seemingly oblivious that the
Mother Teresa Home for Infant Children in northwest Washington, D.C., is now defunct. She said she worked tirelessly
to ""cut through all the red tape,"" although it appears that red tape prevented the work from continuing. According to a
pastor at the church next door to the home's former location, the adoption ministry failed to take off because the
Roman Catholic nuns who ran it weren't allowed to care for babies without medical personnel on site. ""I'm not sure the
legal thing that came down upon them, but they realized they needed to expend their energies in another way,"" said
Maureen Freshour, who along with her husband, David, pastors Chevy Chase Baptist Church and lives nearby. Freshour
has stayed in touch with the nuns from the Missionaries of Charity order who ran the home and said that the remaining
three or four sisters have moved to another house in Washington, where they are ministering to the homeless.""This has
been a core issue—adoption—whether the home [Clinton] talked about survived or not,"" said Chuck Johnson, chief
operating officer of the National Council for Adoption. ""It's an issue she's been consistent on.""During her speech on
Thursday, Clinton reminisced about the 1994 National Prayer Breakfast when she attended as first lady and Mother
Teresa was the speaker. The Roman Catholic nun delivered a blistering speech about abortion, saying, ""Any country that
accepts abortion is not teaching its people to love, but to use any violence to get what they want."" Mother Teresa then
called on attendees to fight abortion through adoption: ""Please don't kill the child. I want the child. Please give me the
child.""The audience that day gave her a standing ovation—but President and Mrs. Clinton, both pro-abortion, did not
stand. Afterward, Mother Teresa asked to meet with Hillary Clinton and they went to talk behind a curtain on the stage,
sitting on folding chairs, Mother Teresa in sandals even though it was winter.""She told me that she knew that we had a
shared conviction about adoption being vastly better as a choice for unplanned or unwanted babies,"" Clinton related last
Thursday. ""And she asked me—or more properly, she directed me—to work with her to create a home for such babies
here in Washington.""Clinton followed through and set up a home for unwanted babies in Washington in just over a year,
no small feat in a city that was known then for its inefficient and corrupt bureaucracy. The Mother Teresa Home for
Infant Children opened in June 1995 in the district's affluent Chevy Chase neighborhood to house eight pregnant
mothers and their babies—but it remains unclear whether it facilitated any adoptions.I called the Missionaries of Charity
in Washington, a worldwide Roman Catholic order established by Mother Teresa. The nun who answered the phone said
she couldn't give her name because they aren't allowed to talk to the press. She did say, however, that the sisters who
are in the order now were not in the order when the adoption home opened, so she wasn't sure why it closed. She
added that the order sold the Chevy Chase house in 2002. ""We work with the poor and we didn't have any work there
because it's a rich neighborhood,"" she said. The sisters, she added, are now working with the homeless and those with
AIDS in a more transitional neighborhood in the northeast section of town on Otis Street.
###"
170;I will look into what happened to it after 2002 (LH was released 6/03, so better than 04)
170;Aye
170;"I hadn't heard about this piece until you emailed. It comes out later this week but what's leaked so far is definitely a
doozie
Unclear to me why anyone ever cooperate with Rolling Stone"
170;Attached is the story in scanned form. Not sure if you can open/read on your berry, so will make sure Lauren has too
170;"Reines, Philippe I
Wednesday, June 23, 2010 3:41 PM
H
Valmoro, Lona J; Hanley, Monica R
Tonight
So DS will take you from the WH"
170;"Now hearing that If you that's great - same plan. If you
come back to office, just need to tell Huma what you would have told her via email, that you're skipping the concert
Again, your tickets and concert plans will not be altered, we've assured that can't happen"
170;do I have the plan right?
170;"PIR <preines _
Wednesday, June 23, 2010 6:51 PM
H; Lona Valmoro
'hanleymr@state.gov'
Re: Tonight
Where did you say you are going?"
170;"PIR <preines
Wednesday, June 23, 2010 6:54 PM
H; Lona Valmoro
'hanleymr@state.gov'
Re: Tonight
Huma still at your house?"
170;"Top 2 Civilians Face Rockiness in Afghan Shift By MARK LANDLER The New York Times Thu, July 1, 2010
WASHINGTON — As General David H. Petraeus takes command in Afghanistan, the two top American civilian officials in
the war face an uncertain and tricky future, working with a newly empowered military leader, under the gaze of an
impatient president who has put them on notice that his fractious war council needs to pull together.
Richard C. Holbrooke, the Obama administration's special representative to the region, and Karl W. Eikenberry, the
ambassador to Afghanistan, both hung on to their jobs in the uproar that followed Gen. Stanley A. McChrystal's career-
ending quotes in Rolling Stone magazine.
But privately, at least one senior White House official suggested using General McChrystal's exit as an excuse for a
housecleaning, according to senior officials. That was rejected as too disruptive during a military campaign that relies
heavily on civilian support, these people said.
In recent days, other administration officials have begun floating the idea that Ambassador Eikenberry might be
replaced by
Ryan C. Crocker, the highly regarded former ambassador in Iraq who forged a close partnership with General Petraeus
during the successful Iraq troop increase.
Such a prospect is viewed as remote, given Mr. Crocker's prestigious new post at
Texas A&M University. But the fact that his name is being invoked underlines the challenges that confront Ambassador
Eikenberry, as he adapts to a new partner — one who has strong ideas about how soldiers and diplomats should work
together in war.
It also illustrates the remarkably powerful role that General Petraeus will assume in the nine-year-old war, setting him
up as almost a viceroy in Afghanistan and a key broker in negotiations between President
Hamid Karzai and Pakistan over an eventual political settlement.
Prior to General Petraeus's arrival, some critics said the White House had created a problem by recruiting several
forceful, ambitious personalities and giving them jobs with overlapping responsibilities. Administration officials
acknowledge that, as one said, ""There are obviously a number of substantial personalities on the team."" But the White
House believes that the current lineup can mesh, and that a difficult war demands this much talent.
Still, the McChrystal blow-up has reverberated through the State Department. Secretary of State
Hillary Rodham Clinton instructed Ambassador Eikenberry and Mr. Holbrooke to take a hard look at the civilian team,
two officials said. She is not wedded to the current lineup if it continues to bog down in internecine battles, they said.
""You can't have a major shift in a civ-mil structure without having the civilian side take a step back and look at
everything,"" said a senior State Department official, using the jargon for a civilian-military campaign.
Be
General Petraeus, whose appointment was approved 99-0 by the Senate on Wednesday, took pains at his confirmation
hearing on Tuesday to back a unified civilian and military effort. He noted then that he had telephoned Mr. Holbrooke
and would rendezvous with Ambassador Eikenberry in Brussels, so the two could land in Kabul together.
""Holbrooke has been my wingman, to a great degree,"" General Petraeus said in an interview. ""We have had, and do
have, a very good relationship."" That role, he said, will now fall to Ambassador Eikenberry.
Ambassador Eikenberry was highly critical of the Pentagon's proposal last year to send 60,000 additional troops to
Afghanistan, which led to a difficult relationship with General McChrystal. But in fact General Petraeus was the true
architect of the plan.
The ambassador, a retired lieutenant general and former commander in Afghanistan, graduated from
West Point in 1973, a year ahead of General Petraeus, but they did not know each other at the academy. The two share
a scholarly bent: General Petraeus holds a Ph.D. from Princeton, while Ambassador Eikenberry has Master's degrees
from
Harvard and Stanford.
While they were never assigned together, their careers intersected twice. In Iraq, General Eikenberry led an assessment
of Iraqi security forces while General Petraeus was commanding the 101st Airborne Division in Mosul. When General
Eikenberry was commander in Afghanistan, General Petraeus led an assessment of Afghan National Security Forces.
General Petraeus declined to discuss personnel issues, while Ambassador Eikenberry and Mr. Holbrooke turned down
requests for an interview. Mr. Crocker, now the dean of the George Bush School of Government at Texas A&M, did not
return a call for comment.
For Mr. Holbrooke, the new landscape is challenging in other ways. Officials said his job security was less in doubt than it
was six months ago, when his ouster was the subject of endless Washington chatter. Yet he has arguably become a less
central player:
Jacob J. Lew, a deputy secretary of state, manages much of the civilian influx in Afghanistan that Mr. Holbrooke helped
shape, while the embassy in Kabul is carrying it out. Mr. Holbrooke's current portfolio has played to his weaknesses, his
own allies admit. He is best as a high-level negotiator, and not as comfortable with the nitty-gritty work of helping
Afghanistan build an economy.
These days, Mr. Holbrooke has become a globe-trotting diplomat, trying to retain flagging European allies while seeking
to draw influential Muslim countries like Egypt into helping Afghanistan. At a recent conference of 35 countries in
Madrid, Mr. Holbrooke drummed up more support from allies for the Afghan government's campaign to reintegrate
Taliban fighters into mainstream society.
Mr. Karzai's longer-term effort to reconcile with Taliban leaders, and his negotiations with Pakistan, could propel Mr.
Holbrooke back into a central role. Were these talks to become more serious, several officials said, Mr. Holbrooke's
negotiating skills could be put to use, as a broker and guardian of American interests. For now, though, as evidence of
General Petraeus's influence, he will do most of the shuttling between Kabul and Islamabad.
On his last visit to the region, Mr. Holbrooke met with Mr. Karzai and with senior Pakistani officials, including the army
chief of staff,
Ashfaq Parvez Kayani. Mr. Holbrooke's past run-ins with Mr. Karzai, several officials said, have not hindered his ability to
deal with the Afghan leader, and Pakistani officials said they trusted him.
Husain Haqqani, Pakistan's ambassador to Washington, said that Mr. Holbrooke took time to understand Pakistan's
concerns. ""Ambassador Holbrooke is liked by some, admired by others and seen as effective, even by those who may
not like him,"" Mr. Haqqani said.
Still, General Petraeus is indisputably the key player, and he has wasted no time asserting his control. On a secure
videoconference call last Saturday, a person familiar with the call said, General Petraeus threw his support behind a
costly, and controversial, plan to install temporary generators to supply more electricity to Kandahar, the Taliban
stronghold that is the next major American military target.
Mr. Holbrooke and Ambassador Eikenberry swiftly assented."
170;"MS -
We're hoping you'll be ok with taking one of the videos you were going to record tomorrow - the one for the Pakistani
audience - and instead deliver the remarks live in the Treaty Room, one of those things where you just pop out the side
door, make a statement, vamanose back through the doors
You have the time in the morning, we'd be dropping a video, and it will have ten times the impact. And to sweeten the
deal...
We can scrub BOTH flood related videos and merge their remarks into one live Treaty Room Statement
Please let us know so we can make the necessary changes and preparations.
PIR"
170;"MS -
We're hoping you'll be ok with taking one of the videos you were going to record tomorrow - the one for the Pakistani
audience - and instead deliver the remarks live in the Treaty Room, one of those things where you just pop out the side
door, make a statement, vamanose back through the doors
You have the time in the morning, we'd be dropping a video, and it will have ten times the impact. And to sweeten the
deal...
We can scrub BOTH flood related videos and merge their remarks into one live Treaty Room Statement
Please let us know so we can make the necessary changes and preparations.
PIR"
170;Ever since you've become a Mother-in-Law you've been very funny
170;"We're preparing a statement to go out from you once it's confirmed that six of the deceased are Americans. Will send
to you once otherwise fully cleared."
170;Ok
170;"Cc: Jake Sullivan; megrooney(
MS-
Below is a statement drafted by Megan, reviewed and edited by me, Jake, SRAP and others, and with your ok will go out
immediately (pis ignore any spacing or formatting issues):
SECRETARY OF STATE HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON
###"
170;
170;Done
170;"'Inept' US cannot fix Afghanistan: top Saudi prince Sun, May 16, 2010
RIYADH (AFP)— An ""inept"" United States cannot fix Afghanistan's problems and should simply focus on ""chasing the
terrorists"" there, former Saudi intelligence chief Prince Turki al-Faisal said on Saturday.
The ex-ambassador to the United States also challenged Washington to produce results in just-started Middle East
peace talks, and accused US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton of undermining efforts to make the region nuclear-free.
AFP — Saudi Arabia's former intelligence chief Prince Turki al-Faisal delivers a speech during a conference ...
In a speech in Riyadh before diplomats, Turki said US-led NATO troops had irrevocably alienated the Afghan people and
had no hope of rebuilding the country.
""What Afghanistan needs now is a shift from nation-building to effectively countering terrorists,"" Turki told the Arab
News conference.
US President Barack Obama ""should not be misdirected into believing that he can fix Afghanistan's ills by military
means.""
""Hunt down the terrorists on both sides of the Afghan-Pakistan border, arrest them or kill them, and get out, and let the
Afghan people deal with their problems.
""As long as GI boots remain on Afghan soil, they remain targets of resistance for the Afghan people and ideological
mercenaries.""
Turki, who has long served a central role in Saudi-Afghan relations, scolded Washington's handling of relations with
Kabul.
""The inept way in which this administration has dealt with President (Hamid) Karzai beggars disbelief and amazement.
""Both sides are now filled with resentment and a sour taste in their mouths,"" he said. ""How can they both get out of that
situation? I don't know.""
The chairman of the King Faisal Center For Research and Islamic Studies, Turki has no official position but is believed to
often reflect high level thinking in the Saudi government.
He is the brother of Foreign Minister Prince Saud al-Faisal, and analysts speculate he could become foreign minister
when Saud retires.
Turki said Arab states have given Washington four months to show progress in US-guided Palestinian-Israeli peace talks.
""The Arab world has given Obama until September to get things done,"" said Turki.
""It is not enough to talk the talk. He has to walk the walk.
""If he does not succeed... then I (will) ask President Obama to do the morally decent gesture and recognise the
Palestinian state that he so ardently wishes to exist.
""He can then pack up and leave us in peace and let the Palestinians, Syrians and Lebanese negotiate directly with the
Israelis. No more platitudes and good wishes and visions, please.""
Turki also faulted the US and European approach in trying to halt Iran's alleged efforts to build a nuclear weapon.
""The discussions on Iran's nuclear ambitions started off on the wrong foot. The carrot and stick approach does not
work,"" he said.
For one, he said, the US and Europe have had double-standards in dealing with Iran on the one hand, and other nuclear
countries on the other.
""You cannot ask Iran to play on one level while you allow Israel, India, Pakistan, and North Korea to play on other levels.""
Turki said a successful strategy toward Iran requires even-handedness, a ""universal nuclear security umbrella"" for the
countries in the area, and ""a good military option"" against any regional country which does not cooperate.
He said Clinton had undermined efforts to move toward a regional nuclear-free zone, after the UN Security Council's five
permanent members recently expressed support for the idea.
""Alas... Clinton then voided the issue of its value by stating that the conditions do not yet exist for establishing the zone,""
he said.
""Why, then, did she join the other members of the P5 in issuing their statement?""
Turki said he hoped Obama ""will find the way to correct his secretary of state's nullification of making our area free of
weapons of mass destruction.""
Turki also warned of rising violence in Iraq after the pullout of US troops next year, warning both internal and external
groups seek to carve up the country.
""Imagine what will happen once internal strife and fighting escalates"" following the US pullout, he said.
Without a UN Security Council effort to protect Iraq's current borders, the consequence could be ""regional conflict on a
scale not seen since the Ottoman-Safavid wars of the 17th and 18th centuries,"" he warned."
170;Defer to Jake, but checking in with NEA (Jeff's on travel so might take a little longer)
170;"WASHINGTON (AP) - The Obama administration targeted key leaders of Afghanistan's Taliban with new financial
sanctions Thursday in a move that could complicate relations with Pakistan and Afghan efforts to reconcile with
insurgents.
The action by the Treasury Department will freeze the militants' assets, ban travel and trigger an arms embargo. It
follows similar action by the United Nations earlier this week, and comes after calls from Gen. David Petraeus, the top
military commander in Afghanistan, and Sen. Carl Levin, D-Mich., chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, for
sanctions against Afghan insurgent commanders operating in Pakistan.
Taken together, the U.S. and U.N. sanctions prohibit any financial transactions of the terror leaders in U.N. member
countries, putting additional pressure on Pakistan to take broader actions against the Taliban militants.
Three financial kingpins were targeted with sanctions, including a key member of the Haqqani network, which,directs
operations against U.S. and coalition forces in Afghanistan from safe havens in Pakistan. Among those sanctioned
Thursday was Nasiruddin Haqqani, an emissary for the Haqqani Network and brother of Sirajuddin Haqqani who leads
the group with his father, Jalaluddin.
Others sanctioned included Gul Agha Ishakzai, the head of the Taliban's financial commission and Amir Abdullah, the
former treasurer to captured Taliban leader Mullah Abdul Ghani Barader. The sanctions placed on the three leaders as
terrorists would deprive them of the assets they need to fund their terror operations, said Adam J. Szubin, director of
Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control. ""We will continue to aggressively work to expose and dismantle the financial
networks of terrorist groups in support of the president's goal of a stable Afghanistan,"" he said.
According to officials, lshakzai is the head of the Taliban's financial commission, has collected money for suicide attacks
in Kandahar, Afghanistan, and has been involved in the disbursement of funds for Taliban fighters. He has served as a
main financial officer and close adviser to Taliban leader Mullah Mohammad Omar. Abdullah has reportedly traveled to
Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Libya and the United Arab Emirates to raise money for the Taliban and facilitate meetings and
communications with key leaders. Nasiruddin Haqqani has collected funds for the Haqqani group, including from al-
Qaida. Last week, Gen. David Petraeus, the top military commander in Afghanistan, urged officials to add commanders
from the Haqqani network to the terrorist list. At the time, administration officials said a review was under way, largely
accelerated after the May 1 failed Times Square bombing. The man who has pleaded guilty in the New York incident,
Pakistani-born American Faisal Shahzad, said he trained with the Pakistani Taliban to build bombs, then returned to the
U.S. to launch an attack that would avenge attacks on Muslims by U.S. forces overseas."
170;"Our schedule is pretty tight on the flight to Elmendorf - but we should be able to find a few minutes for you on the leg to
Tokyo"
170;"Pulse - automatically updates when you open it. If you look to the left of each name of the news org, you'll initially see a
circle like symbol. That means it's updating.
Oh, actually the problem you are having is that it needs to find WiFi - do you have WiFi in whatever home you're in now?
We just need to set that up once and it will subsequently connect whenever it senses that wifi.
And yes on Monday can spend some quality time."
170;"Let me ask Justin/Huma
And on Monday I'll set it up so that it has a near permanent Internet feed"
170;"There's only one way to top tonight's entertainment when we next host the S&ED...
We have one year to train Renee Fleming to simultaneously sing and juggle chainsaws
Let's see them beat THAT"
170;"RELEASE IN PART
B6
I for one loved that you finally called out the ogrish males on your staff who roll their eyes at womens issues and events
But fyi I'm pretty sure I saw roll their eyes at the very moment that you were obviously referring to them.
They just don't get it"
170;"PIR <preines
Thursday, May 27, 2010 11:48 PM
Jake Sullivan
Re: Brookings
Sorry,
just seeing this.
Sanger has a blog item on the NYT site about the comment, but more of a political take in that if you run for president
again your opponents will pull the Brookings tape. And a couple of wingnut blogs asking why you don't just volunteer
more of your own money to taxes, and that you chose Brazil as a ""socialist country that sides with our enemies as a
model."". But frankly, I had to look pretty hard to find that, I was the 19th person to read it. Not 19,000th. 19th.
Most coverage was either straightforward about the NSS, or your comments about the debt as a national security
problem.
But feedback I got was strong, people always always always love you in that format."
170;"Things aren't as bad as they seem.
It took a little bit to figure out, but turns out that O'Reilly didn't have a new show last night - in its place they re-aired the
show from May 17th, the original night Posner got beat up. I guess O'Reilly is taking a 4-day weekend, don't ask me why
they picked that show to air in its place. So you were watching a repeat:
http://www.billoreilly.com/show?action=viewTVShow&showID=2612"
170;"PIR <preines
Monday, August 16, 2010 11:48 PM
Huma Abedin; CDM; Jake Sullivan
""minister in a skirt""
http://mobile.nytimes.com/a rticle?a=644869
North Korea Takes to Twitter and YouTube By CHOE SANG-HUN The New York Times August 17, 2010
SEOUL, South Korea - North Korea has taken its propaganda war against South Korea and the United States to a new
frontier: YouTube and Twitter.
In the last month, North Korea has posted a series of video clips on YouTube brimming with satire and vitriol against
leaders in South Korea and the United States.
In one clip, it called Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton a ""minister in a skirt"" and Secretary of Defense Robert M.
Gates a ""war maniac,"" while depicting the South Korean defense minister, Kim Tae-young, as a ""servile dog"" that likes to
be patted by ""its American master.""
Such language used to be standard in North Korea's cold-war-era propaganda. Its revival is testimony to the increased
chill in relations between the Koreas in recent months.
In the past week, North Korea also began operating a Twitter account under the name uriminzok, or ""our nation.""
Both the Twitter and YouTube accounts are owned by a user named ""uriminzokkiri."" The Web site
www.uriminzokkiri.com is run by the Committee for the Peaceful Reunification of Korea, a propaganda agency in
Pyongyang.
Lee Jong-joo, a spokeswoman for the Unification Ministry in Seoul, said, ""It is clear that these accounts carry the same
propaganda as the North's official news media, but we have not been able to find out who operates them.""
The two Koreas agreed to stop their psychological war after their first summit meeting in 2000. But South Korea
resumed propaganda radio broadcasts in May, when it accused the North of torpedoing one of its warships, killing 46
sailors.
North Korea, which denies involvement, has vowed to retaliate. It appears to have found a way with Twitter and
YouTube, with their intended audience clearly South Koreans. (North Korea keeps its people isolated from the outside
world.)
""YouTube and Twitter gave North Korea a high-tech detour for its propaganda,"" said Paik Hak-soon, an analyst at Sjong
Institute. ""But fundamentally, it's not new technology but rather political tension that drives the North to lash out
desperately in the face of mounting international pressure.""
During the cold war era, South Korea punished people caught listening to North Korean broadcasts. Several years ago,
during the brief era of its ""sunshine policy"" of engaging the North, the South allowed its people access to North Korean
Web sites. But today, when a computer user in South Korea clicks on an item on the North Korean Twitter account, a
government warning against ""illegal content"" pops up.
These blocks have triggered criticism here that the Seoul government does not trust its people to form their own
opinions about the totalitarian North.
But the government says the North is using the Internet to spread conspiracy theories about who was behind the sinking
of the South Korean warship, including one claim that an American submarine did so to foster a militant mood in the
South.
The Twitter account, which provides links to the North Korean Web site, had 928 followers as of Monday. But a few
YouTube video clips uploaded by the North commanded thousands of views.
In one such clip, North Korea attacked Yu Myung-hwan, the South Korean foreign minister, who recently criticized ""pro-
North Korean youths"" who voted for the opposition in the June local elections, saying, ""If they like the North so much,
they should go and live under Kim Jong-il.""
The clip's narrator calls Mr. Yu a ""pro-American flunky"" and advised Mr. Yu to earn a living ""mopping the floor of the
Pentagon.""
Another clip claimed that North Korea would prevail in a war with the ""American imperialists"" because it was armed
with nuclear-fusion technology; because of its juche, or ideology of ""self-reliance""; and because of a philosophical
treatise written by Kim II-sung, the North's founding president and the father of Kim Jong-il, who died in 1994.
""I don't think this propaganda from the North will have any significant impact among South Koreans,"" said Yoo Ho-yeol,
an expert on North Korea at Korea University here. ""People watch this for fun, not to be influenced."""
170;"PIR <preines
Thursday, September 2, 2010 6:33 PM
H
CDM; Huma Abedin; Lona Valmoro; Jake Sullivan
Joint Interview
MS —
Jake just relayed yoLir desire to cancel tomorrow's interview. But I want to make sure you are aware of a few things that
he was not in a position to share:
1) The Israeli & Palestinian interviewers and their teams skipped returning home today with their principals at great
cost and energy in order to stay the extra day to you. One skipped traveling onward with Abbas.
2) Both the Israeli & Palestinian media outlets involved immediately announced their joint interview and are hyping its
unprecedented nature
3) Because of #2, U.S. media is fully aware that this interview is scheduled for tomorrow morning.
So three points:
1) There is an incredibly high expectation for this interview occurring and canceling, no matter the reason cited, will be
taken to mean something negative2) The point of this interview was to shape the narrative coming out of today, and
canceling will only contribute to a negative narrative in that we will be canceling on the most important figure in Israeli
media, and I do not see Channel 2 taking that well3) As positive as the symbolism of this interview was meant to be,
we run the risk of the negative symbolism by canceling.
Typically when you want to cancel something I roll with it. But I want to strenuously object to doing so in this case. I
understand you told the participants they should refrain from public comment, but first, that doesn't mean you have to
and second, you know they won't really refrain. And I am certain they will appreciate the effusive things you have to say
about them during this interview. Not to mention that the reason for canceling is something we ourselves could have
foreseen before going so far down the road, and should have - which I don't think is fair or reflects well on you.
Lastly, on a much more practical note: to get you out of this I am going to have to bribe Channel 2 with a significant and
exclusive interview when we are in Jerusalem in two weeks, and I guarantee you that will be far more painful than
tomorrow's relative short and peaceful format.
If you'd like to discuss I'm at my desk and available or can call you through Ops."
170;"PIR <preines
Thursday, September 2, 2010 6:48 PM
H
CDM; Huma Abedin; Lona Valmoro; Jake Sullivan
Re: Joint Interview
Before I call Udi Segal of Channel 2 I would like your ok to commit you to an interview while in Jerusalem on the next
trip."
170;"and which you could do
Otheriwse it would be Channel 2 solo,
IN Israel
Sent from my iPad
On Sep 2, 2010, at 9:00 PM, H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
> What did you decide? I'm assuming you got my earlier email saying I'm willing to do if we have answer on moratorium."
170;"PIR <preines
Thursday, September 2, 2010 9:11 PM
H
Re: Interview
RELEASE IN PART
B5, B6
B5"
170;Aye aye
170;"PIR
Thursday, September 2, 2010 9:47 PM
H
Jake Sullivan; Huma Abedin; Lona Valmoro
Interview is ON
RELEASE IN
PART B5, B6
Humpty Dumpty is back together again - so at 9:15 you will be jointly interviewed by Channel 2 and PTV"
170;"PIR <preines
Thursday, September 2, 2010 10:09 PM
H
Jake Sullivan; Huma Abedin; Lona Valmoro
Re: Interview is ON
And don't pretend you're not seeing this! We know your tricks"
170;"Dan who?
No, they are on"
170;"B6
i would advise
B5
B6
Cheryl Mills<
RELEASE IN PART B5,B6"
170;"The Economist has invited you to submit an 800 word piece for their 2011 outlook issue. You'd be the only USG official,
and would be featured with David Cameron and other heads of state. We all agree we should definitely do. It's a bit of a
short fuse, so if you agree Josh Daniel would work on boiling down your CFR speech."
170;I imagine early next week
170;I'll get you a list - but those were first year totals so by now it might have evened out.
170;"The lash is why you beat them in miles!
• Let me get you actual #s
But both Madeleine and especially Condi were on the road an awful lot"
170;"RELEASE IN PART
B6
Thank you!
Hope you are having a happy holiday despite the Wiki work
See you Monday
On 11/25/10 12:35 PM, ""Evergreen"" <Hdr22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
> Philippe--
And expressing my thanks for all
> you've done for me and our efforts over the last year. Enjoy the
> day--H"
170;"Without the benefit of seeing the clips yet, I think last night worked well. Pitch perfect, positive in that you wrapped
yourself in the wonderful event.
I actually think there was more interest in whether the Imam was there - as evidence of how much voltage the Mosque
issue still carries. Geoff Earle of the NY Post was there for that reason alone. It's early but my read of the NY Post seems
that their cover is dedicated to KSM losing 40 lbs."
170;"No real harm, other than taking up your time. But no real upside either. Over the last decade you've only spoken to one
or two people on the record for books, but have regretted dozens, many from people close to you. It's just been easier
saying no to all. Doesn't make it a wise policy, but it's been SOP.
If you'd like I can a) check in with the author, see if he has others of stature talking to him; and b) tend to Sid"
170;Yes, I'll go back and watch and listen and have fixed as necessary
170;"You're right, it was AP that got it wrong which is why you saw it repeated in several stories. Having it corrected.
Speaking of AP, today is s birthday, would be a nice touch to SlyDial him a birthday greeting. I'll give the # to
Huma and Lauren (he's not coming on trip so you won't see him)"
170;"To follow up on a conversation Jake had with you about regional media at the end of this week's MEPP, we're
recommending that at the end of Thursday or Friday morning before you leave DC that you do two TV interviews: one
Israeli (likely Channel 2), and one with AI Jazeera. If you're open to it, we could try something creative and have both
interview you at same time. They'll likely balk but worth a try just for the symbolism"
170;"RELEASE IN PART
B6"
170;"Monica said you asked about the camera
He is shooting broil for the interview you will do with Julia Roberts later in October - focusing mainly on women's issues.
By the time you read this they will be all done.
And FYI, the cameraman (Allan Palmer) and produce(Coby Atlas) might look familiar to you - they are from Tavis Smiley's
team, they did his special on you."
170;Ok
170;Yes
170;"Fascinating read
http://mobile.nytimes.com/articlejsessionid=5BC84EF426D7B4AD6F8FF526C7C4E890.w5?a=686322&f=19"
170;"A reporter named Kerry Elleveld of The Advocate is doing a possible cover story on your LBGT efforts at State. Caroline
has put her through the ringer of Cheryl, GLIFFA leaders and members, gay ambassadors, Pat Kennedy, etc etc. Would
love to put you on the phone with her in the next day or two. Should be super positive."
170;Of course
170;"Two notes on reporters who'll be in our small package today:
1) Laura Brown, Australian citizen who writes for Harpars Bazaar - she's embarking on a piece on you
2) Indira Lakshaman of Bloomberg is back to work after"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
176;"Our clips service doesn't have the license necessary to provide FT (or Reuters) content, so here's the long awaited FT
profile -you'll be especially interested in the guest column David Milliband wrote:
An FT interview with Hillary Clinton
By Daniel Dombey
FT
June 11 2010 22:21
This is what it is like to be Hillary Clinton. The motorcade, twisting and skidding through rain-splashed
streets for more than an hour; the public meetings and camera lights at journey's end; the spotlight that
has not let up for two decades. It is almost as if the 2008 US presidential election - hailed as the most
exciting for a generation - had never ended.
But this is a campaign without a vote. Today, Clinton's convoy is snaking through Sao Paulo, Brazil, not
South Hampton, New Hampshire. She herself is no longer an aspirant for the White House, despite what
the overnight flights, town hall meetings and strategy sessions that make up her gruelling schedule might
suggest. Instead, she is in Latin America to shore up relations with the region and promote a new idea of
US leadership, one very much built around herself.
She's had bigger and more ecstatic audiences than the 700-odd students and staff crammed into the hall
tonight at Zumbi dos Pradares, an Afro-Brazilian university, but she's still greeted by a wave of raised
arms as the audience snaps away at her with their mobile phones.
In the convoy moments before, she was wrapped in a shawl, suffering from a cold and angry at the delays
that pushed us into the side streets speckled with box-like bars, warehouses and love hotels while
Brazilian motorists sought to cut into our path. There is no sign of that now. With the metabolism of a
born politician, she feeds off the energy of her audience and takes questions from students, teachers and
local celebrities for an hour. Hillary Clinton never looks happier than when she is centre stage.
Most US secretaries of state wouldn't bother with this sort of event, much less initiate it and arrange for it
to be screened on the biggest local channel. Yet this is what Clinton does on almost every foreign trip -
and she seems to spend half her life on her official 727, crammed with long-time aides and armed
bodyguards. The schedule is backbreaking and constantly shifting. She has notched up more than a
quarter of a million miles since taking office.
On this Latin America trip, thrown into confusion by an earthquake in Chile, we have already visited four
countries in 24 hours. We go to tiny Uruguay, where our stay is so brief we check into a hotel just for a
shower; Argentina, where we spend almost all our time at the presidential palace; Chile itself, where we
don't leave the airport; and Brazil, where we spend almost a full day.
So what exactly is Clinton trying to do on this never-ending world tour? Travelling with her for a week,
talking to people inside and outside the administration, I tried to find out.
""We now have a case to make and it is not just a case that is made to the president or the prime minister
or the foreign minister or an ambassador,"" she tells me a few weeks later, as she perches on a sofa in her
expansive office, with its view of the Lincoln Memorial. ""People now have a voice and an opinion and a
vote in many instances on the direction that their own societies take ... I want to model a different kind of
leadership that is open and willing to listen but [also] to stand our ground if necessary.""
She argues that these trips of hers help to restore the US's image in the wake of the Bush administration
- by making contact with public opinion abroad, and so boosting American power. Her aides say that, as a
battle-hardened politician who also happens to be one of the most famous women in the world, she is
ideally placed to carry out the task. But the deeper question is whether she is merely implementing the
foreign policy crafted by Barack Obama, her boss and former rival, or whether her role - and ambitions -
go beyond that.
Is she a kind of saleswoman-in-chief for the US, I ask? ""Well, I think that is part of the job,"" she replies,
toying with the napkin underneath her glass of water. ""If you are making a case for American values and
for American leadership, you have to make it where people now get information ... Given the bridges we
had to build and some of the repair work we had to do, we had to travel.""
As in S'ao Paulo, her system is under strain - ""I've been fighting this all day,"" she says as she masks a
cough set off by her allergies (Washington's cherry blossom trees are shedding their flowers). Life is still
hectic - the volcanic ash cloud has just all but paralysed Europe and televisions throughout the State
Department are showing the first British election debate. But Clinton remains enthusiastic, affable and
unhurried, her speech peppered with exclamations such as ""oh my gosh"", even as she discusses issues of
state. She politely asks if I have any updates for her about Europe's airspace shutdown and tells me she's
been talking to Norway's foreign minister about it.
""He said that this dust gets into engines of any size, even Air Force One - it's chunky! I don't know how
else to describe it,"" she says, an odd note of hilarity entering her voice as she pronounces the word
""chunky"".
Clinton often speaks in this eager, unvarnished way - a world away from the clipped, on-message manner
of her immediate predecessor in the post, Condoleezza Rice. If anything, she is an undiplomat - known
less for calibrated circumlocutions than for her plain speaking and sometimes her gaffes, a woman who
retains both a formidable political constituency and a laugh she once admitted can send cats scurrying
from a room.
Her staff point out she is only the third elected politician in 60 years to have served as secretary of state,
and the first to come from outside the foreign policy establishment since James Baker, George H.W.
Bush's right-hand man and perhaps her most illustrious recent predecessor. She may be the most
substantive politician in the office since William Jennings Bryan, the three-time presidential candidate who
served as secretary almost a century ago. ""Her stature on the world stage, her almost presidential
stature, has set her apart,"" Bill Burns, the top career diplomat at the State Department, tells me. ""Leaders
want to meet her. And the town hall meetings do make a difference with public opinion.""
State visitor Hillary Clinton is greeted by Air Force Base Commander Colonel Celso de Araujo at S'ao Paulo
airport in March
Back in Sao Paulo, the meeting at the university ranges far from the confines and dramatis personae of
traditional diplomacy. Annie, a young woman with red and blue dreadlocked hair, tells Clinton about her
dance and percussion classes and asks how to study in the US without paying college fees. A nervous
young man confesses himself lost halfway through an abstruse question about tariff policy; Clinton,
smiling and nodding in that vaguely automatic way of hers, bears with him all the same. Another female
student asks for an autograph. When answering, Clinton sometimes opens her eyes wide as she
emphasises a phrase; at other moments, seemingly at random, she pulls her hands apart as if
demonstrating the size of a fish.
Then a law student called Marina asks about abortion - which is illegal in Brazil - and Clinton moves into
treacherous terrain. She speaks of the Brazilian hospital she visited in the 1990s that treated not just
expectant mothers but women suffering from the consequences of backstreet abortions. ""Wealthy women
have rights in every country,"" she says. ""And poor women don't."" Her strength of feeling can't be hidden
as she denounces ""the great toll that illegal abortions take and the denial of women being able to exercise
such a fundamental personal right"".
Tom Shannon, the US ambassador to Brazil, tells me later: ""I understand the possible concern that we
might have come close to domestic issues. But she wasn't laying out a prescription for Brazil. She was
sharing her experience as a woman in American politics and as secretary of state."" It's true: Clinton
doesn't quite cross the line. Onstage, she is controlled without seeming artificial, convivial without
appearing over-effusive, what a previous age would call a real trouper. At the podium she looks straight
ahead, her lips carefully expressionless. Still, the old competitive instincts haven't left her. Perhaps it is
the lecterns at press conferences, reminiscent of the Democratic presidential debates, but on exiting the
podium at a joint appearance with Argentina's president Cristina Fernandez, Clinton makes clear her
satisfaction at having had the last word. The expert debater who usually bested Obama has not left the
stage.
Yet that competitive urge coexists with what one insider describes as her ""almost inhuman loyalty""
towards Obama. Her mastery of the facts - an ""information carnivore"" one of her officials calls her -
comes despite the consensus in much of Washington that her role consists largely of implementing the
foreign policy Obama and his inner circle have framed, rather than helping frame it herself.
In Sao Paulo, she shows her loyalty in striking fashion when she is asked repeatedly about positive
discrimination - another sensitive topic in Brazil - not least because, Clinton herself observes, Afro-
Brazilians account for more than half the country's population but only 2 per cent of university students.
""That suggests to me that some special steps need to be taken [in] recruiting and admitting students so
that they can have a chance to succeed,"" she tells the hall, again inching towards domestic politics, before
speaking of her pride in the progress the US civil rights movement has made in the past half-century. She
says: ""The election of Barack Obama, many believe, was the greatest accomplishment of all because it
demonstrated that an African-American could be elected president of the United States.""
Among the crowd, I catch my breath and scribble down her words. It's hard to think of a more fulsome
statement from the woman who fought so hard against Obama - and who squandered a huge poll lead
and millions of dollars in the struggle against him.
The great collaborator Clinton has established strong working relationships within the Obama
administration
When I ask Clinton later about how she managed to move from the antagonism of the primary race to the
obedience of office, she dismisses my question with an anodyne ""that's politics"". She adds: ""We're
working really hard and well together ... It just never comes up any more, it seems like ancient history to
me."" Not so ancient, I think, that she is willing to admit the failings of her campaign. ""I always run
inclusive and successful organisations,"" she retorts when I ask her whether she'd applied any lessons from
that searing experience to her new post.
She admits she didn't want the job at State - she says she was exhausted by the election and missed the
Senate -. ""but at the end of the day, I'm pretty old-fashioned and if the president asks you to do
something, you'd better have a really good reason why you can't."" Also, she adds: ""Suppose I had won
and I were asking him to be in my cabinet ... I would have wanted him to say yes.""
Others say the relationship is more complex, that by dint of her loyalty and unflagging hard work, Clinton
has moved closer to the charmed circle and made herself an even more formidable political force than
before. ""Quite simply, she gives good advice and the president over a year and a half has recognised
that,"" says Anne-Marie Slaughter, head of the State Department policy planning unit. ""The relationship is
based on her performance in the job.""
By all accounts, it's a collaborative partnership, though not perhaps a warm one. Clinton boasts a good
working relationship with the main players of the administration - and has formed something of an
alliance with defence secretary Robert Gates, although on life-and-death issues such as Afghanistan, it is
Gates, not her, who has taken the lead. As one official told me, secretaries of state have often either been
popular with their own department - Colin Powell comes to mind - or with the rest of the administration -
as was Condoleezza Rice - but Clinton has managed to be both.
In truth, Clinton's language remains harder-edged than Obama's - she recently claimed that Iran's
Revolutionary Guard had staged a slow-motion coup - and she has sometimes been more willing than he
is to hint at using the military. ""She seems to step up with a bit of spine just at the right time,"" says Kurt
Volker, a US ambassador to Nato under George W. Bush.
She has also assumed an ever more prominent role in talking to leaders such as Benjamin Netanyahu of
Israel and Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan - apparently because she is trusted both by them and Obama.
Meanwhile, she has been careful to keep her husband, the former US president, in the background. Aides
say they have barely seen him in the building - though Clinton herself says that behind the scenes Bill
Clinton gives her strategic advice. ""One of his favourite sayings, that I remind myself of all the time, is a
kind of baseball saying,"" she says: ""Don't major in the minors; keep your eye on not just the headlines
but the trend lines.""
It is her co-operative stance rather than any notable effort to set out a grand vision of her own that is the
chief theme of her time so far at State. When I ask Clinton to name her proudest achievement in office,
she replies ""the effective and collaborative approach that this administration has taken towards identifying
and solving problems."" A more process-oriented, less provocative answer would be hard to imagine.
But maybe, I think, the US has less scope for grand strategy than it did in the past couple of decades,
when the country seemed to bestride the world colossus-style. Clinton herself suggests that so formidable
are the tasks confronting the US that the administration has little scope to enter into internecine fights but
needs instead to focus on the challenges to hand. Whatever the reason for her stance, it seems to be a
smart decision - by all accounts she's overcome many of the suspicions the White House retinue had
towards her.
""It's fair to say that she was not born into the administration's inner circle but slowly but surely, for the
most consequential decisions, she now has a prime seat at the table,"" says one official. Praising what he
calls her ""Terminator-quality durability and determination,"" he adds: ""She's done an amazing amount of
work, judging that the way to build a strategic vision is bottom up, by mastering the details.""
Indeed, Clinton's ability to master the most arcane foreign policy briefs is the marvel of her building. She
has dropped into obscure working groups and shown an unnerving knowledge of their details. At her
confirmation hearings last year she exchanged facts about the arctic with an Alaskan senator; at the
meeting in So Paulo she becomes enthused about freight transport policy both in Brazil and the US. She
herself acknowledges that finding her feet on foreign policy was something of a struggle, despite her
campaign claims of expertise in the field. ""It was so intellectually challenging, just to get our arms around
all of these issues,"" she says. During her first year, she was criticised for apparent gaffes - including the
way she called for Israel to halt all building of settlements on occupied territory only to hail a partial freeze
a few months later as unprecedented. On an election campaign, she says, ""you may be in a different city
four times a day but you have a message you're trying to deliver that is repetitive and aimed at your
audience. But here you might deal with 10 different countries' problems, six different regional or global
challenges in the course of a day.""
As the Latin America tour shows, she is now trying to do both - travel incessantly and solve an array of
international issues. She is at the forefront of the US's efforts to consolidate relations with a number of
important countries - predominantly Russia and China, but also rising powers such as Brazil, Turkey,
Indonesia and South Africa - and to cool down anti-American feeling in hotspots, notably Pakistan. She
says the push is working, hailing a ""change in public opinion in places that were pretty negative about the
US"" - a reference to Russia and Pakistan. But it is far from smooth sailing. Differences about Iran and
over Israel's raid on aid-bearing ships off Gaza have stoked tensions with Turkey and Brazil recently, amid
questioning of the effectiveness of the Obama administration's policies.
During my time with her on the road, the stop in Brazil is the focal point - not surprising given the
country's increased profile as Latin America leader. Clinton is now heading the administration's push to
secure sanctions on Iran, and in Brasilia she tries and fails to win President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva to her
cause. She employs an almost combative tone at a press conference with Celso Amorim, Brazil's foreign
minister. At moments she appears to barely contain her irritation, as she denounces ""an Iran that runs to
Brazil"" as well as other countries such as Turkey and China ""telling different things to different people to
avoid international sanctions"". Amorim is spiky in his own way - drawing parallels to the 1990s sanctions
on Iraq and the claims about weapons of mass destruction before the 2003 war. ""Of course, I don't agree
with everything the Secretary said,"" he says.
It is not a happy experience - indeed this past week both Brazil and Turkey voted against sanctions at the
United Nations - yet Hillary Clinton is nowhere near giving up. Years ago, one of Bill Clinton's biographers
described his approach to government as a ""permanent campaign"", and it appears to be his wife's
preferred form of existence as well. If there is one constant in Clinton's life, it is that she never throws in
her cards, whether what motivates her is power or public service.
""Never, never!"" she exclaims, when I ask whether she ever thought of walking off into the wings after the
frustrations and indignities of her time at the White House. ""I have a very realistic sense of what high-
stakes politics requires and it took me a while to get there because it's shocking when you are in the
arena ... but once you figure it out, you can take it seriously for purposes of analysis and understanding,
but you can't take it personally."" Such treatment seems to rankle all the same. She's been listening to
coverage ahead of the British debate and is plainly irritated by the coverage of the leaders' wives.
""Whether a woman's running for office or she's supporting her husband who's running for office and she
gets criticised for wearing open-toed shoes or for the colour of her coat, there's just a lot of history that
you bear if you are a woman who puts herself out in the political arena,"" she says.
Another country Clinton boards her official 727 to fly from Sao Paulo to Costa Rica
Injustice towards women appears to be the issue that most enthuses Clinton in this job - as in her many
other incarnations in American public life, whether as First Lady or before. ""I feel passionately it is in not
just the American national security interests but the world's, that women be given the opportunities and
the tools to make the most out of their own lives,"" she says.
In the 1990s she steered clear of reading the newspapers because of the way she was treated. Today, she
says, ""I certainly don't read coverage of me, I read what else is going on that I need to know about to do
my job."" ""It's all baloney,"" says Philippe Reines, her press adviser, who set up the meeting with her and is
sitting to one side in her office.
""Yeah, yeah, right, that's what he tells me,"" Clinton responds.
I wonder. She may not read the stories about her, but she has boosted her domestic profile still further by
talking to American magazines such as Esquire, Vogue and Parade. To what end? Clinton has said she will
only serve one four-year term as secretary of state - understandable, given the grind of the job. When I
ask whether she expects a woman president in the next decade or so, she responds: ""I'd love that,
obviously I would love that. I want to be front and centre when it happens.""
""Any chance it would be you?"" I ask.
""No, no, I don't think that's in the cards,"" Clinton says. She's given more categoric denials in the past. ""I
think that there's a whole generation of young women and not so young, but mature, seasoned women
who are earning their stripes and recognising how tough it is out there. It is not for the faint of heart to
run for president, and I believe it is harder for women, it just is, and that's just a fact."" But, says one US
official, ""all the profiles and all this media treatment undercut the argument that she is finished with
electoral politics. Why do all this stuff? She's already Hillary Clinton. You have to ask: 'What's the idea
behind raising her domestic profile still further?""
Indeed she is now, by some counts, the most popular politician in America and some in Washington say
she could be a good fit for the vice-presidential slot in the 2012 elections.
Back in Sao Paulo, once the town hall meeting is over, Clinton faces a seven-hour flight to Costa Rica. The
journey goes on and on, and as saleswoman-in-chief for the US in an unruly world, she faces a long, hard
road. Today the US sometimes struggles to assert itself on the world stage. But the obstacles are rather
fewer if the product she is pitching is herself. A secretary of state like none before her, Hillary Clinton,
long one of the most formidable figures in US politics, is looking stronger than ever.
Daniel Dombey is the FT's US diplomatic correspondent
David Miliband: ""Hillary is a rock star ... she has a great sense of fun, and a great sense of humour""
It's too early to start chalking up a scorecard because Hillary Clinton, and the Obama administration, is
laying the foundations for long-term change in America's foreign policy. The challenges are immense -
probably more difficult than the inheritance of any previous administration. But American leadership is
essential and a commitment to multilateralism - in fact multi, multilateralism using different and
overlapping forums - is real and right.
You also have to remember that Hillary is a rock star. When I arrived at the Nato Foreign Ministers
meeting in March 2009, it was a nice surprise that all the staff, never mind the press, seemed to have
turned out in droves for my arrival. Then I realised that Hillary was 10 minutes behind me.
That said, the thing that most surprised me about working with Clinton was not her intelligence or her
hard work, all of which are well known, but that behind the serious exterior is someone who has a great
sense of fun, and a great sense of humour. She has seen politics from all sides, and can laugh at herself
as well as at others.
She's a remarkably good listener, always synthesising ideas and opinions to develop her own. She thinks
strategically as well as tactically. She's also very, very unpompous. Hillary is a very political person but in
a particular way, she honours politics and public service and believes that democratic politics is not a
necessary evil, but a calling of value and vocation. She knows you win some and you lose some, but it's
essential to take part.
There's one other thing. Hillary is a people person in that she thinks deeply about the psychology of the
people she's dealing with. Their motivation, their loyalties, their culture. It's real emotional intelligence in
trying to understand why people disagree and how you can get them to agree. I think that must be why
so many other members of the administration say she is a very good colleague.
David Miliband is shadow foreign secretary
Gideon Rachman: ""Relations between the White House and the State Department are not particularly
close""
A school teacher asked to write a report on Hillary Clinton's stint as secretary of state would have to give
her 10/10 for effort but a rather more modest mark for actual achievements - maybe a six or a seven.
Secretaries of state are generally judged on two criteria. First, how have they done in the endless
bureaucratic turf wars that characterise Washington politics? Second, how effective have they been in
promoting US foreign policy in the wider world? Success in one area usually helps in the other. Henry
Kissinger was a superb Washington infighter - and his close relationship with President Nixon made him
all the more effective overseas. Colin Powell, George W. Bush's first secretary of state, was widely
admired outside the US - but came out on the wrong side of many of the Washington battles, which
limited his ability to get things done in the wider world.
Hillary Clinton has skilfully avoided being sucked into the debilitating Washington struggles that so
damaged Powell. Despite the often poisonous rivalry between the Obama and Clinton camps during the
campaign, Clinton has a good working relationship with the president. But while relations between the
White House and the State Department are cordial, they do not seem to be particularly close. Clinton
appointed many loyalists from her own campaign to the State Department, with the result that State is
rather detached from Obama's inner circle. Obama's penchant for making high-profile speeches in foreign
capitals such as Cairo, Prague, Tokyo and Istanbul means that the president himself has done more than
anyone else to define his administration's approach to the world.
That still leaves a role for Clinton to fill in the crucial details of policy. But special representatives have
been appointed to deal with Afghanistan and the Middle East - and the Treasury is critical to China policy.
Asked about Clinton's impact as secretary of state, one senior European policymaker purses his lips and
says: ""She's done some great trips, and she's highly professional. But it's hard to see any particular area
where she has really driven policy.""
Gideon Rachman is the FT's chief foreign affairs columnist
David Rothkopf: ""When she has been asked to deliver tough messages, she has done so unflinchingly""
Hillary Clinton has been a cautious secretary of state: she has protected the president well and pursued
his agenda without upstaging him - an early concern, given her stature. She has worked very well with
other members of the cabinet, and is reconsidering the role and structure of the State Department.
That includes a review of the role of diplomacy going forward. Clinton has not only acknowledged the rise
of new powers and a changing global power structure but has taken steps to reshape US foreign policy
structure accordingly. An important part of that has been recognising the importance of co-operating with
private and non-state actors such as NG0s, as well as dealing with non-state threats.
When the administration has called upon her to deliver tough messages, she has done so unflinchingly.
This has allowed the president to articulate a strategic vision which Clinton then goes about implementing.
Still, neither the secretary of state nor the president determines the global situation. The US may be the
most powerful country in the world but it is one among many powerful countries, and many aspects of the
situation we face today are beyond our control. The Obama administration has been dealt an extremely
difficult hand: not only Iraq and Afghanistan, but Iran and North Korea's nuclear programmes, the rise of
emerging powers and a complex and still unfolding series of financial crises.
We have gone from a world in which the US thought it had limitless resources and unbounded options to
one where the limits are clear; from a world in which you could work in the GB to one where you have to
work in the context of the G20; a world where new technologies and new powers play a bigger role. All of
those things would dictate a change in foreign policy regardless of who is in office.
Hillary Clinton has established a very solid foundation. The next step is to identify a couple of signature
issues - and have a couple of signature successes. That will take her to the next level.
David Rothkopf is a visiting scholar at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace with expertise in
national security"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
81;See note below
81;"I'm giving you credit for inspiring the ""peaceful"" protests."
81;"Importance: High
Jake may have sent but In case not.."
81;
81;
81;----
81;-----
81;"Contrast between Benghazi and reports from the West: Here in Benghazi since Thursday, I have joined our
representative, Chris Stevens, in meetings with a large number of representatives from the TNC, civil society, UN
organizations and NG0s, and the diplomatic corps. While we had no idea that our trip would correspond with significant
military advances in the east and the start of the coordinated Tripoli uprising dubbed ""Operation Mermaid Dawn,"" the
timing gave us the opportunity to note the contrast between the relative bureaucratic quiet here compared to hyped-up
activity in western Libya. Clearly, some coordination is underway between Benghazi and the west: Ali Tarhouni, recently
promoted to Deputy Prime Minister In a still-to-be-completed cabinet reshufle, previewed the Tripoli uprising with us,
down almost to the minute. Yet one feels that, to a large extent, TNC officials are observers and chroniclers rather than
the authors of the unfolding developments to the west. (In a telling anecdote, just after confiding in us the plans for
Tripoli about to unfold, Tarhouni turned off his ringing cell phone, to concentrate on talking to us in a leisurely
manner.) What TNC officials told us to a large extent was sensible and mostly reassuring in its content -- and the TNC
just issued a directive reiterating its policy to treat combatants according to the Geneva conventions and observe human
rights -- but their comments fell mostly in the category of passive analysis rather than aggressive forward
thinking. Washington has task forces in focused on Tripoli; Benghazi does not
While there's a sense in the air that the final battles have begun, that palpable anticipation does not seem to have
translated into the type of stepped-up bureaucratic activity that one would expect. After meeting with us for nearly two
hours on Thursday, TNC Executive Committee chair (and PM equivalent) Mahmoud Jibril returned to Doha rather than
head any kind of war room here. I was on the ground far longer than Jibril, giving another cameo appearance
here. Tarhouni confided that there is no plan for when or how the TNC would relocate quickly to Tripoli, should Tripoli
fall. TNC Chairman Mustafa Abduljalil (who remains by all accounts a unifying figure here) is a humble, retiring leader,
which after Qadhafi's flamboyance is part of the attraction for Libyans but which does not make him naturally think of
how to project INC authority and symbolism quickly to the newly liberated areas. The question is when Tripoli falls, do
the extensive plans that the TNC has made about the post Qadhafi transitional structures have any relevance for
Tripoli? I do not want to overplay this: the flags being raised in the western towns are the flags used here. Our visit to
the military command center demonstrated that there is active information flow (if not exactly command and control)
passing between east and west. Tarhouni and others who visit western towns, usually from Tunis, describe support
there and from tribal leaders across Libya. No other groups are claiming to have established or planned for an
alternative civilian authority to compete with the TNC. Still, in our engagement with TNC officials, we will need to
remind them continually of the imperative to nurture their legitimacy and authority and to prevent a political vacuum
that others could fill -- especially after Tripoli falls and the INC is here, not there.
We've talked a lot about Tripoli and whether a battle for the capital could be avoided, which we argued would be the
best solution. One of the TNC's assets is the moral distinction between what the Libya that the TNC aspires to promote
and how Qadhafi has treated Libya's citizens. The world's attention will focus on a battle for Tripoli, we cautioned, and
acts of brutality and revenge and potential internal fights among competing militias will blur that moral distinction even
more than the assassination of INC Chief of Staff Abdulfatah Younis already did. The damage to the TNC's credibility
could be irreparable. We also noted that a TNC led negotiation that succeeds in winning Tripoli without a fight would
underscore the TNC leadership far more dramatically than a successful militia assault only vaguely connected to the
Benghazi leadership. The TNC officials heard us out patiently, but they clearly were not in the mood to negotiate. They
feel confident about the current military situation, and they remain convinced that Qadhafi simply will not give up no
matter how high the pressure. If anything, their positions have hardened in recent weeks, with Abduljalil telling us that
the TNC will no longer contemplate Qadhafi staying in Libya once he is out of power. Saif Qadhafi is seen in the same
category as his father. I do not believe that anything short of a significant change -- Qadhafi's departure, a military
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739732
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045090
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739732
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
setback that punctures the TNC's current confidence, NATO insisting on a pause in operations in favor of negotiations --
will persuade the TNC leadership that it is in their interest right now to offer Qadhafi a peaceful way out. Tarhouni also
acknowledged with his trademark candor that, to the Libyan people right now, negotiations would appear weak and
not a satisfactory climax to the revolution. They do have a point that, despite signs of desperation around Qadhafi (e.g.,
Mohammed Ismail's multiple attempts to contact Gene Cretz and me), there is no indication that Qadhafi himself is
prepared to throw in the towel. There is real fear that, should Qadhafi somehow make it from Tripoli to Sebha, a guerilla
war could persist for years, with supplies and mercernaries smuggled across the Saharan border.
Among other topics, we pushed the INC officials hard on starting a high-profile discussion immediately on the
reconciliation which is part of the TNC's platform. We noted that the many victims of Qadhafi's 42-year rule will be less
likely to pursue individual acts of revenge If they are assured that there will be some form to address grievances through
rule-of-law accountability. The same message should also appeal to average Libyans who for whatever reason remained
as part of Qadhafi's regime to the end but who have no blood on their hands and might otherwise fear retribution. INC
officials refer approvingly to the South African and Moroccan models, and they reiterated their commitment for an
inclusive process for Libya's future that welcomes all but the most notorious individuals around Qadhafi. Yet they still
seem to rely largely on (variously described) luck, tribal discipline, and the ""gentle character"" of the Libyan people as the
best assurances against abuse and revenge killings. We will continue to push on this.
Benghazi remained full of chatter about the Abdulfatah Younis assassination. With tribal visits and investigation
committees and cabinet changes, the INC addressed the immediate crisis sufficiently effectively that the intiial tension
and gunfire quickly dissipated. But the assassination highlighted two realities of Libyan life that TNC officials had
previously tried to downplay: tribes and militias. Rather than denying the tribal affiliations of Libyans, TNC officials are
now looking to the tribes as part of the solution in enforcing discipline and preventing the type of widescale looting and
pillaging that destroyed Benghazi's security infrastructure in March. Tribes, we heard, can also be a corrective balance
to Islamist leanings. On reining in the militias, we heard no good answers. Some people (Tarhouni, INC National
Security Advisor Bazama, some civil society representatives) spoke frankly about the problem, including the Islamist
leanings of the most powerful. The Islamist militias deserve more discussion in other channels, but a couple of people
noted that the Younis assassination had an upside in making scrutiny of this issue imperative. Others seemed to rely,
again, on luck or tried to avert their eyes from the problem that militias could post on the Day After. There was
widespread disdain for Qatar's role in encouraging certain militia elements, and I will be able to cite lots of concern here
when I go to Doha later. Qatar's role, too, is a subject better discussed elsewhere.
We also discussed humanitarian and financial needs. Tarhouni and Jibril noted that the TNC's financial needs increase as
more territory falls under rebel control; they are worried that, if they can't provide electricity to newly liberated towns
or fund other services there, disenchantment with the TNC will grow. Tarhouni agreed to reach out to the Indians to
discuss Libya's outstanding debts, to see if he can help us get India's hold on the frozen asset proposal lifted. Briefed on
South Africa's objections, fibril understood the need for continued outreach to Africa (although part of our South Africa
problem may derive from Jibril's poor relations with Zuma, with Jibril telling us that he recently accused Zuma of making
Nelson Mandela feel ashamed); Abdulrahman Shalgam will go to the August 25-26 AU Summit and Jibril did not rule out
attending himself. I've spoken several times to UAE Foreign Minister Abdullah bin Zayed since arriving here, and the
UAE has finally responded positively to our soft collateral proposal for a loan to the TNC, which may be our fastest way
of getting funds here, assuming we can come up with a letter that meets the UAE's needs and passes the scrutiny of the
U.S. interagency process.
My traveling companions, Bill Roebuck (NEA/MAG director) and Ben Fishman from the NSS, start their return trip today.
I will go on to Cairo, Doha, and Abu Dhabi, where, inter alia, I will have more Libya discussions, including seeing Jibril
again in Doha. With NileSat continuing to broadcast Qadhafi's propaganda, the Libyan anger over Egypt's role
approaches if not exceeds annoyance with Qataar. We are also checking on how to get from Cairo back here, should I
need to join Chris here in the coming days.
Chris and his tiny staff are doing a heroic job in representing our interests here. I am especially appreciative to DS for all
the work done to support my trip. I also want to highlight the work that Pat Kennedy's M family and NEA/EX did in
establiishing living and working quarters for Chris and his team. Thanks to a lot of creativity and hard work, the
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739732
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045091
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739732
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
environment for American staff here is significantly improved over what I saw two months ago when we were located in
the downtown Tibesty Hotel.
— Jeff
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739732
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045092"
81;
81;"we are preparing for sandy here. parts of the city are crazy already. there is a crane on top of a high building on 57th
street that they think is about to fall which is pretty crazy everything is shut down but its been a good conference call
day!
i talked to chris this morning and she is gathering things for you based on all the the things we discussed there is a
possibility of 3 nice gowns and a lot of blouses and jackets i think we should find a day in ny sometime soon so you can
try things on.
Had long visit with my friend who was in benghazi will download in person but think very important for you to call B6
he injured DS officer he is now well enough to talk he doesnt want a visit but a check in call and asking him if
he needs anything would be good monica will remind you of this
Also heard from both the bush and reagan libraries over the last few days neither wants to host the osc.ar exhibit after it
leaves little rock so i think we will focus on making that exhibit amazing and i will explain situation to odlr.
more later
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739777
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045765"
81;"Talking Points for Secretary's Call to North Korea Detainee's Family
1"
81;"Just called house and got vm.
Have a few odd and ends. Nothing urgent for tonite but would like to send you a revised summit schedule for your sign
off after we do our planning calls tonite."
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, April 11, 2009 6:11 PM
Re: DPRK - Final P5+J text
Am sure it will be fine. Will pass that on."
81;
81;
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, May 02, 2009 12:42 PM
B6"
81;Can be easily done. We will work on it and send you revised schedule.
81;"Iran: US journalist's case will get fair review
TEHRAN, Iran — Iran's foreign minister assured his visiting Japanese counterpart that the case of an American journalist
imprisoned in Tehran for allegedly spying for the United States will get a fair review on appeal. Foreign Minister
Manouchehr Mottaki said 32-year-old Roxana Saberi's appeal will be ""reviewed justly and humanely."" He spoke at a
joint news conference Saturday with Japan's Hirofumi Nakasone, who expressed concern over the case during his visit to
Iran. Saberi is a dual Iranian-American citizen who was born in Fargo, North Dakota. Her father is Iranian and her
mother is Japanese. She was arrested in January in Tehran and sentenced last month to eight years in prison after a one-
day trial behind closed doors. Her case has raised an international outcry"
81;"Here is what we can do if you take the 1pm shuttle. Do u want to still do press or move to tuesday? I also think we can
clear your schedule tomorrow and move things into the rest of week so u can stay in fly.
Afternoon Meeting with the FM Armenia
3:00pm Meeting with Joe Klein
3:30pm
3:45pm Meeting with David Ignatius
4:15pm
4:15pm Brief Meeting with Jim Smith,
4:30pm (saudi amb choice)
4:30pmBrief Meeting with Steve Radelet, MCC choice 4:45pm
5:00pm Meeting with Shimon Peres
(He's now saying he can't go to state. So we may have to move to tuesday)"
81;"I've been working on it.
We can clear tomorrow.
We will insert schedule into the rest of the week and send you a revised line block."
81;"Moving everything now. You had no press anyway so all is easily done.
You won't be canceling anything, just adding things to tues, wed and thurs."
81;"Tuesday
Huma Abedin <Huma@clintonemail.com>
Sunday, May 3, 2009 3:07 PM
H; 'habedin ; 'ValmoroU@state.gov B6
Re: Tomorrow"
81;2014-20439 Doc No. C05761162 Date: 06/30/2015
81;"Dennis ross wants to talk to you.
2"
81;He's in cairo. Saying after 2:30 is ideal. Secure is better. You can call from the grey phone.
81;Dennis ross just spoke with cdm and says he doesn't need to speak to u anymore.
81;"Revised karzai secpres coming thru on secure fax now
7"
81;"Yes. There isn't. Ann Manes team brainstormed on ideas for a day long session and celebration but didn't materialize.
We looked into doing something else last week but given the swine flu outbreak, most people were either canceling or
toning down things. Dan Smith said that even the mexican embassy isn't doing what they normally did either."
81;Calls with turks will not take place this morning.
81;"Carolyn maloney called for you.
•-"
81;Times just didn't work. We are looking for different times today.
81;i think hes trying to see if he can get there immediately
81;745
81;
81;"Al Gore
4"
81;"Wjc called during dinner. Its morning in seoul.
The number that works is
I told doug u r home and wjc will call when he can."
81;"I'm sorry.
9 ,"
81;"tonite. I'm sorry.
Ok great
His guy Conor called me at 11 saying he had just heard from Gore."
81;
81;
81;"Will do
Abedin, Huma
Saturday, May
Re: Holbrooke
<AbedinH@state.gov>
09, 2009 12:08 AM
called for you"
81;"Pi Crowley
Daniel Benjamin
Judith McHale
Robert Blake
34"
81;III lock in today.
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Tuesday, March 31, 2009 6:14 AM
H; Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacobi
Re: UNHRC
We are tracking this down."
81;"• Intervention excerpt, as delivered:
""We must also support efforts by the Government of Afghanistan to separate the extremists of al-Qaida and the Taliban
from those who joined their ranks not out of conviction, but out of desperation. This is, in fact, the case for a majority of
those fighting with the Taliban. They should be offered an honorable form of reconciliation and reintegration into a
peaceful society if they are willing to abandon violence, break with al-Qaida, and support the constitution.""
• CNN excerpt:
QUESTION: And on this reconciliation, bringing members of the Taliban or al-Qaida
SECRETARY CLINTON: Only the Taliban, we never said al-Qaida. We never said al-Qaida. We have no interest in any
kind of reconciliation or any rapprochement by anyone with al-Qaida.
QUESTION: I'm glad you clarified that
40"
81;"• Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, May 09, 2009 9:29 AM
Richard
Just got an email saying richard is available at your convenience Also, pdb coming at 10am.
6"
81;He says berry phone better for today
81;Oscar has it. Should be printing now.
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, May 9, 2009 1:07 PM
H
Today
Want to make sure you know michele krohn friedson is doing advance for the memorial service. She worked for us for
many years in nyc office. Now working for kirsten."
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, May 09, 2009 1:19 PM
Susan rice says she needs to talk to you. Ops can connect.
11"
81;
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH©state.gov>
Friday, May 22, 2009 4:48 PM
Calls
- call cheryl
- Durbin called u back.
Is available for next few hours on
- don't return barak call. Mitchell just talked to him. We'll get you call readout first and then u can decide if u want to
talk to him."
81;Fyi
81;"Update from pir:
Pis tell HRC he changed his lede graf to read:
""SAN PEDRO SULA, Honduras — Thirty-four members of the Organization of American States gathered here Tuesday to
argue over whether to readmit Cuba. By evening, an isolated United States was still struggling to fend off a vote to lift
the ban on Havana.""
Much better, word ""failed"" doesn't appear
6"
81;
81;
81;"Oscar should have printed gates shangrila conf speech.
Also, he should have printed the draft US-EU joint statement on Georgia for your approval. We would like to release it
jointly with the EU, under the your name. Goal is to issue Monday in advance of planned demonstrations.
1"
81;"If u r still up, wjc landed in brazil for refuel. He should be on the ground for an hour or so. Call dougs cell.
„
2014-20439 Doc No. C05761619 Date: 06/30/2015"
81;I do.
81;Went on a falucca ride and are now at the bar/restaurant downstairs.
81;Fyi
81;4
81;"Cheryl and Huma,
As HRC requested for this weekend, attached is a draft base text for the big speech/FA article. I will be on a
plane all day Wednesday heading for Asia to do policy planning talks, so it would be great to have her feedback either by
phone on Monday or meeting with her on Tuesday — that way I could turn around another draft by Thursday to
response to her reactons and then Lissa and I could work on turning it into a real speech draft and circulate more
widely. I will also have plenty of time on my trip to work over a version that would be more suitable for Foreign Affairs,
assuming she is comfortable with the overall frame and the different pieces.
Have a good weekend!
AM
5"
81;"Long time politico, was close to rajiv ghandi. III send his bio to oscar to print for you.
On election calls, SCA is recommending calls to Congress Party head Sonia Ghandi, outgoing FM Mukherjee, and
incoming FM Krishna. We also have a call sheet for Prime Minister Singh in case you want to call. Please let me know if u
want to do these calls tomorrow."
81;"By MATTHEW LEE
WASHINGTON (AP) — Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton will soon announce that gay American diplomats will be
given benefits similar to those that their heterosexual counterparts enjoy, U.S. officials said Saturday.
In a notice to be sent soon to State Department employees, Clinton says regulations that denied same-sex couples and
their families the same rights and privileges that straight diplomats enjoyed are ""unfair and must end,"" as they harm U.S.
diplomacy.
""Providing training, medical care and other benefits to domestic partners promote the cohesiveness, safety and
effectiveness of our posts abroad,"" she says in the message, a copy of which was obtained by The Associated Press.
""It will also help the department attract and retain personnel in a competitive environment where domestic partner
benefits and allowances are increasingly the norm for world-class employers,"" she says.
""At bottom, the department will provide these benefits for both opposite-sex and same-sex domestic partners because
it is the right thing to do,"" Clinton says.
Among the benefits that will now be granted gay diplomats: the right of domestic partners to hold diplomatic passports,
government-paid travel for their partners and families to and from foreign posts, and the use of U.S. medical facilities
abroad.
In addition, gay diplomats' families will now be eligible for U.S. government emergency evacuations and training courses
at the Foreign Service Institute, the message says.
The announcement, expected this week, was provided to the AP by a State Department official who is a member of the
Gays and Lesbians in Foreign Affairs Agencies organization. Two department officials not affiliated with the organization
confirmed its accuracy.
The officials spoke on condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to speak publically about the changes."
81;"Importance: High
This is still being reported, we have no confirmation."
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sunday, May 24, 2009 11:12 PM
Fw: (AP) North Korea: Nuclear Test
We are getting press confirmation. EAP is preparing call sheet for possible calls you place to the Japanese and koreans,
maybe chinese tomorrow morning."
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, May 09, 2009 1:57 PM
Service
You will see your speaking order in program, there will be no intros, you just walk up to podium.
1A"
81;"She called me while you were in service. Pis call her as soon as you can. They have been negotiating on the middle east
presidential statement and have come to a disagreement with lavrovirussians.
They are reaching out to susan now but she is telling them she's consulting with washington
and will call them back so if u can pls call when u get in car. Jake is also aware.
1z"
81;
81;17
81;
81;"I'm going to skip Yale today.
Assuming that's ok with you.
14"
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Monday, May 25, 2009 7:32 AM
Re: Calls sheet for S calls to JPN, KOR, CHN and RUS (SBU)
Japen comfirmed for 7:45
Koreans confirmed for 8:45 (you can call ops from your berry) China offering 9pm tonite if that works for you."
81;"John crosby will be there. He's the tall blonde advance guy who's been on the plane with us a few times too.
He will have program for commencement and acknowledgement card for lunch.
You will go straight backstage and can go to hold if u want to put your robe on unless u put it on in the car."
81;5
81;From barbare lee diamondstein
81;"Father Gutierrez, another honorary degree recipient and founder of Liberation Theology, is also not marching in
procession and may be backstage when you get there.
People at yale think you have to deal with north korea issues so they are fine if need to leave lunch early.
8"
81;"I saw that too
They say they were holding seats just in case but they know he's not coming."
81;
81;"We are going to confirm chinese fm yang call at 9pm unless that's a problem.
11"
81;"Calling you at 9pm with FM yang.
Australian fm smith asking to talk to you tonite about north korea. U want to do after china? Or wait till tomorow?
16"
81;Ok call in 20 min with australian fm smith
81;"I heard from jon.
Wjc reviewed your edits
Said they were all good
Has some of his own (from original copy) that he said he ""doesn't feel very strongly about"" but they make it less wordy
and easier to give. I can send that version to you if u want.
He mentioned you may want the section on ""purpose of power"" at the end."
81;Faxed to house.
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Wednesday, May 27, 2009 6:58 AM
H
Today
13"
81;
81;"Holbrooke called for you. He's in abu dhabi.
Jim steinberg also just called for you."
81;"Good we will proceed.
Also just talked to lippert"
81;Fyi
81;"He can talk to you tomorrow, just wants to talk to before u do anything public.
He has a call with susan rice at 530, after that but I told him u may be out of pocket for the evening."
81;"III explain when I see u.
Not unlike what u thought."
81;
81;"Condi rice checked in during party. She can talk tomorrow between 830 and 1045
F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761898 Date: 06/30/2015"
81;Jeff reports that the exit polls in Lebanon are encouraging. It looks as though March 14 are winning.
81;John kerry called. Didn't give subject matter. Said he's on cell.
81;"Asking to talk to you secure
Hoping to do it soon.
You can call ops from your white phone in office or grey phone on 3rd and they can go secure."
81;
81;"This should have been faxed to house. Here is final schedule:
8:15 am DEPART Private Residence
8:25 am PRESIDENTIAL DAILY BRIEFING
8:30 am DAILY SMALL STAFF MEETING
8:45 am DAILY SENIOR STAFF MEETING
Participants: Jim Steinberg, Jack Lew, Pat Kennedy, P.J. Crowley, Dan Smith, Cheryl Mills, Joan Donoghue,
Anne-Marie Slaughter, Ian Kelly, Rich Verma and Joe Macmanus
9:15 am MONDAY MEETING w/ASSISTANT SECRETARIES
10:00 am OFFICE TIME
11:00 am Secretary's Office
11:00 am MEETING w/ARTURO VALENZUELA, NOMINEE FOR A/S WESTERN HEMISPHERE AFFAIRS
11:40 am DEPART State Department
En route Sewall-Belmont House and Museum
11:50 am ARRIVE Sewall-Belmont House and Museum
11:55 am 2009 ALICE AWARD PRESENTATION
Note: 100 people attending the reception, 250 attending the luncheon. Reception called from 11:00am-12:00pm,
Luncheon from 12:00pm-1:30pm.
Upon arrival, Page Harrington escorts HRC to the tented Garden Terrace, as guests are sitting for the luncheon.
HRC sits at the head table.
At 12:00pm, Peggy Cifrino, Sewall-Belmont House and Museum event chair, delivers welcoming remarks and
introduces Audrey Sheppard, Chair, Board of Directors, Sewall-Belmont House and Museum.
Audrey Sheppard delivers brief remarks and announces HRC as the receipent of the 2009 Annual Alice Award.
HRC proceeds to stage to accept award.
HRC gives brief remarks and departs, luncheon program continues.
12:35 pm DEPART Sewall-Belmont House
12:45 pm ARRIVE State Department
12:45 pm OFFICE TIME
1:40 pm Secretary's Office
1:40 pm PRIVATE MEETING with BAMBI
2:00 pm PHOTO w/VISITING MIDDLE EAST DEMOCRACY ACTIVISTS
2:15 pm MEETING w/MEMBERS OF U.S. COMMISSION ON
INTERNATIONAL RELIGIOUS FREEDOM
Deputy Secretary's Conference Room
CAMERA SPRAY (at the top of the meeting)
Members of U.S. Commission and Staff
Donald Argue, Commissioner
Felice Gaer, Chair
Dwight Bashir, Associate Director
Elizabeth Cassidy, Associate Director
Michael Cromartie, Vice Chair
Talal Youssef Eid, Commissioner
Judith Golub, Director of Government Relations
Richard Land, Jr., Commissioner Leonard Leo, Commissioner
Elizabeth Prod romou, Vice Chair
Nina Shea, Commissioner
James Standish, Executive Director
3:00 pm BILATERAL w/INDONESIAN FOREIGN MINISTER NOER
HASSAN WIRAJUDA
Secretary's Conference Room
OFFICIAL PHOTO (in East Hall preceding bilateral)
3:30 pm JOINT PRESS AVAILABILITY w/INDONESIAN FOREIGN MINISTER NOER HASSAN WIRAJUDA
3:45 pm OFFICE TIME
6:00 pm Secretary's Office
6:00 pm DEPART State Department
6:10 pm ARRIVE Private Residence
F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05761905 Date: 06/30/2015"
81;15
81;4.-
81;"Only addition to your schedule today is tony blair for office mtg. He is seeing mitchell at 11, and will see u right after
around 12 for one on one office meeting. Doug hattaway now coming later in the afternoon."
81;
81;"Want to give you an update on the calls you requested. The ones confirmed are:
- Philippine Foreign Secretary Romulo confirmed for 900am. No translator needed.
- Thai FM Kasit confirmed for right after. No translator needed.
Waiting on indonesia. I left u call sheet and bios on your desk before I left. Ops will call the house."
81;"All speak english. Ops will connect.
In order are:
- 9am: Philippine Foreign Secretary Romulo.
- 9:15am: Indonesian FM Wirajuda.
- 9:30am: Thai FM Kasit
12"
81;No additional call sheets for them. You have the bios for them which have their names and pronounciation.
81;"I called house and got vm
I came to ny last night
Have a few things for you"
81;I sent call sheet for indonesia for marina to give you.
81;21
81;16
81;Fyi
81;Fyi
81;"I'm meeting you at first stop.
I told oscar to pack commencement robe unless u want to use barnards. We would have to take back to dc otherwise."
81;"We have two calls for today:
-canadian fm wanting to discuss sri lanka
- qatar fm on burma.
You want to try and do on drives today? Or when we get back to office?
21"
81;"Ok its a mob scene here
All your people.
They will start the program as soon as you get to your table.
All on with speech?"
81;"They r starting now
I have speeches too, just checking to see if u have edits for barnard."
81;"David miliband called and asking to talk in next few hours. Says topic for call is Iran in run-up to meeting of EU Foreign
Ministers. I'm getting points from jake/dennis/phil.
Also, I set up conf call for you, cheryl and jake for 6:45pm so u can do en route airport. Ok?
I came to dc earlier and am taking my mom to airport right now. Worked out seating with usss so you are set. Tomorrow
coming at 7:30 with"
81;"You should call into ops when u get in car. They will patch you into Jake and cheryl. I told them 6:45pm.
88"
81;94
81;
81;"B6
My random stuff can wait till the morning:
- talked to who is back to really wanting an ambassadorship
- mark weiner wants to have a party for capricia, told him we'd love it but after the confirmation and we can do
something nice on 8th floor
Vuants to come see u privately this week. He wants to talk to you about iran before he sees biden at a
fundraiser when he's in dc this week."
81;-2014-20439 Doc No. C05762334 Date: 06/30/2015
81;98
81;
81;120
81;"I'm droppoing off briefing book for tomorrow
And latest draft of India speech.
There's a note from dennis ross. B6
128"
81;Fyi
81;147
81;
81;"(U) Iranian media report a suicide bomber was killed and two others wounded near the mausoleum in southern
Tehran.
24"
81;Story is out. Richard called again to talk to you about it. Statement is being drafted for your review.
81;"Abedin, Hume <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, June 20, 2009 5:14 PM
Checking in
Hope u r ok. Need anything?
Holbrooke said he talked to david rohde if u want a dowload.
All else is quiet, hope you are getting rest and pls call or email if u need me to do anything. See you tomorrow.
•30"
81;
81;
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Thursday, July 02, 2009 8:48 AM
Fw: DPRK launches two short-range missiles (U)"
81;8
81;10
81;I actually think that's better, we had entertained it but didn't know what u would be up for. Will proceed.
81;
81;"Pdb on the way
Also, there's a secpres from rch that needs ur signature.
13"
81;"Esther brimmer and jake report that the IAEA board has just elected Amano by a vote of 23-11-1. The presumed
abstention is Argentina. The abstention brought the required vote down to 23 from 24.
15"
81;"Left final schedule in car.
Isabelle set for 7:30am
Russians have not confirmed 730am call. Call sheet won't come till the morning.
Marianne set for 8:30pm tomorrow night."
81;"The g3 is delayed till 5pm wheels up
There is a lear available at 2pm with 6 seats.
Do u want to just leave at 5?
16"
81;
81;
81;18
81;2pm is now no longer an option. Only option is 5pm wheels up.
81;"- pls call jake when u can thru ops. He has a few things to report
- Holbrooke called me this morning with a point that hasn't been presented to u. He doesn't think u absolutely have to
do camps if u go to pak. He thinks a short visit with officials, just a few hours doing bilateral things is sufficient and
talking about idps while u r in country will more than make the point. Something else to consider as u make ur decision.
20"
81;Yes confirmed.
81;"Call with chris hill and jake is scheduled for 2pm. Ops will connect to house.
22"
81;"U may have talked to him cause he called direct too. But jones left message on my cell about an hour ago.
23"
81;"Call with chris hill moved to 230 instead. He's still with Maliki
24"
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Thursday, July 02, 2009 4:33 PM
Fw: King Abdullah names Prince Hussein Crown Prince"
81;
81;"Isn't a surprise since 5 years ago he removed his brother as official crown prince.
Basically he's not honoring his fathers dying wish but since constitution says it should be son (with brother as option) he
has clear authority to do it. I personally think this shows confidence in his position as he's not worried about an outcry
from his fathers loyalists."
81;"Well he's very young, only 15.
Rumor is hes smart, quiet, bookish. Like his father.
What is interesting is that the reason abdullah gave from removing his brother 5 years ago is that he thought the weight
of being crown prince restricted his life, education and travel. I suspect the reason he's done this is so his son can be
properly groomed from now to inherit the thrown. Life will change dramatically for him."
81;"Schumer returned your call.
Would like to download to you on latest with kirsten/carolyn before u talk to him.
33"
81;
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Thursday, July 02, 2009 8:04 PM
Fw: Schumer
Fyi on schumer call."
81;"Fyi
Nita lowey also just called again. Said she's going into an event and will be out of pocket for a few hours."
81;"I'm sending call sheet as soon as it comes. Jake suggesting that u might want to check in with jim steinberg before the
call too."
81;"Ops just faxed a call sheet for Aliyev to house. Steinberg will be traveling to Baku on July 10, and Jim/Jake/phil think the
call from you will help to pave the way for his trip. There is an info memo on latest developments, a cable summary, and
a bio. You ok with proceeding with setting up call? We can do over next few days if u r ok."
81;Pdb coming on secure fax at 10am.
81;"Call sheet on its way.
Steinberg has cleared
45"
81;"Call with president aliyev has been confirmed for 10am. Ops will call you.
39"
81;"Nita lowey called for you.
Also sending thru a nakasone call sheet. It suggests that you call after the IAEA Board formally acclaims Amano's
election. The meeting to do that is going on now in Vienna, so we will let you know after the election is formally
acclaimed so call can be scheduled if ok with you.
40"
81;As soon as we get word, we can.
81;Will reach out and see if he can do it at noon.
81;
81;
81;53
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Friday, July 03, 2009 11:21 PM
Fw: North Korea fires third missile (SBU)"
81;"Sorry yes exactly
We have shy tomorrow at 10am too."
81;
81;"Colombian president alvaro uribe just called through ops. Said he's available anytime tonite to talk. Am trying to track
down points for you from tom/jake but since u r seeing zelaya tomorrow, I assume u want to do this tonite?
96"
81;"Zelaya tentatively on for 1 (but we understand it might fall thru) but we are currently planning on it.
Uribe is asking to talk to you. He's available the rest of the evening and we can also do tomorrow morning but he didn't
confirm availability for tomorrow. I've asked tom and jake for points for u."
81;These are notes from torn. Let me know if u are ok with ops connecting call.
81;"I addressed this with Lippert when we last had an issue.
Our identified point of contact is Sarah Farnsworth and we talk to her regularly. I will call and find out what happened
but this meeting was confirmed. They are not telling us when things get canceled and I think we need another contact
there if sarah is too overwhelmed."
81;130
81;"Isabelle 7:30
Still working througn trip planning, Saudi still ott and Honduras still on tnougn tne discussions are still aismai."
81;"Not sure if u r still up but I left the tomorrows bfg binder outside your door.
57"
81;Have not heard from carl. Left him 2 messages and emailed.
81;62
81;"Jones wants to talk to you
He's wheels up from ghana at 2:30.
Wants to follow up post carter call.
1 SS"
81;"They said:""Our side has been dialing on Friday evening and Saturday morning our time (Saturday morning and Saturday
evening over there), with no answer. Our side will keep trying, starting again this evening (Sunday morning over there).
1s6"
81;"Had a good call yesterday with our team, reaching out to treasury on change and should know more today.
4cr"
81;70
81;Assume u got this directly
81;167
81;Fyi
81;169
81;Rich reports that Kurt, Ellen Tauscher and Dan Rooney were confirmed tonight!
81;
81;"Reminders: Marianne at 8pm.
Neera confirmed, she will get there at 8:15.
20"
81;He does know
81;"Carolyn Maloney called for you.
And Nita Lowey also wants to talk tonite about the Middle East.
You can reach both through ops.
21"
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.goy>
Saturday, June 27, 2009 11:55 AM
Fw: Mauritanian President Resigns Peacefully as per Dakar Accords"
81;"Reached out tom about your calls this morning.
He reports that the Mexicans are appreciative for the call and are energized. They are reaching out to others to try to
find a helpful solution.
Amorim called the Brazilian Ambassador here, who tom spoke to after your call. Amorim was very happy with the call,
especially the detailed discussion of possible solutions. He professed a desire to work with you to resolve this issue.
Brazil recognizes that it is being tagged as the ""blocker on democratic language and wants to get out of the way. That
explains Amorim's heavy push to give this issue back to Insulza. Torn told the Brazilian Ambassador that Insulza has a big
credibility problem in our Congress, and that we, Brazil, Mexico, and others cannot walk away from the issue. This was
being relayed back to Amorim.
Among a core group of countries there is a growing realization that lack of consensus could be very damaging for the
OAS and its members. Tom thinks your calls have injected new urgency into the search for a solution.
He will be sending a classified update on the latest in a few hours. We will pouch to the house.
83"
81;"We r tracking down cheryl.
Will have a report in 30 min."
81;
81;92
81;Update from tom
81;
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Monday, July 13, 2009 8:40 PM
Oscar will be late tonite, won't get to dc till midnight fyi.
0
lRfl"
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Friday, June 12, 2009 6:53 PM
H; Oscar Flores
wants to come at 8:30am Sunday to see you
Ok?
77"
81;"No news
richard asked you talk to you tonite."
81;"THE WHITE HOUSE
Office of the Press Secretary
For Immediate Release June 28, 2009
Statement from President on the situation in Honduras
""I am deeply concerned by reports coming out of Honduras regarding the detention and expulsion of President Mel
• Zelaya. As the Organization of American States did on Friday, I call on all political and social actors in Honduras to
respect democratic norms, the rule of law and the tenets of the Inter-American Democratic Charter. Any existing
tensions and disputes must be resolved peacefully through dialogue free from any outside interference.""
###
nc"
81;"Russians saying lavrov unavailable and they don't know when he will call back.
Also, feingold called asking if u can talk before 6:30."
81;"Family has asked for there not to be a state funeral. Suggestion is that we send a representative and that our
ambassador might be best choice."
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, August 01, 2009 3:35 PM
H; Oscar Flores
In case u call Iavrov. Oscar, can u print?
Points for call:
1"
81;"Told jim and team.
and will relay message to feingold"
81;"For tonite, I tentatively told usss an 8pm departure from house. Is that ok?
For tomorrow, the mitchell meeting is confirmed for 5pm. So I will confirm doctor for after the mitchell mtg around
615pm. Ok?
IAA"
81;
81;He can do non secure and I will tell them 2.
81;"RELEASE IN
PART
B1,1.4(B),1.4(D)
Russians saying that lavrov could talk after 10:30 am but phil sent message below and doesn't think u need to call any
longer. Bill burns concurs. Ok to tell them no need for a call? They r supposedly tracking lavrov down on vacation."
81;"Not sure if lona sent:
8:45 senior staff mtg
9:15 mtg with assistant secretaries
10 Iran video conference
10:45 drop-by cheryl mtg with scoff gration
11:15 jordanian fm bilat and press avail
12:15 nytimes photo shoot
12:45 potus lunch with emir of kuwait
2:00 pre-brief for landler interview
2:30 landler interview
3:30 small group meeting
You could stay and do Jones after that?"
81;"Spanish FM Moratinos has requested to speak with you today. Tom can give u verbal download but below are basic
points. Let me know if u want us to set up call
Points:
- We condemn the effort to remove Zelaya from office.
- We are working within the OAS and with our regional partners to resolve this situation quickly and in a manner that
restores democratic order.
°- We appreciate the role Spain played in winning quick EU condemnation of the coup attempt.
- Our work is not done. Rebuilding trust among competing political institutions and reducing polarization within
Honduras will take a lot of work. We hope Spain will work with us and the OAS to ensure a restoration of democratic
order that will allow Honduras to carry through with it electoral timetable (presidential vote scheduled for November)
Note from torn:
Aside from the statements issued by the President and the Secretary, we have been working in the OAS Permanent
Council fashioning a consensus resolution mapping out a path forward, reaching out to regional partners ( I have spoken
twice with Salvadoran President Funes, and our Ambassadors have been working with other Central American leaders),
and working within Honduras to limit the damage to Honduras institutions.
;
1ro"
81;Plane is preparing for a 6pm wheels up. Is that ok? Earlier? Later?
81;"For morning appointments.
- Catherine 6:45am (so she can do everything)
- Barbara: 7:15am
- Isabelle: 7:30am"
81;Tough cause ur schedule is so crazy. We can try.
81;
81;"Maybe the new dark green suit
Or blue"
81;Fyi - as we discussed
81;L 2014-20439 Doc No. C05763353 Date: 07/31/2015
81;"Fyi
Original mPcsaPP"
81;
81;
81;
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Thursday, August 13, 2009 3:19 AM
H
Fw: Government denies reports bomber to be freed"
81;Yes 5:00pm. Lona is all over this one.
81;
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Thursday, August 13, 2009 10:52 AM
H
Fw: Mr.Yoo"
81;Importance: High
81;"Importance:
Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, August 15, 2009 9:39 AM
H
Fw: Burma: CODEL Webb meeting with Aung San Suu Kyi
High
- Declassify on: 08/14/2024"
81;Per your call with turkish fm, the meeting in kabul is at 8:30am tomorrow. Jim jeffrey will pass that info to fm.
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, August 15, 2009 4:11 PM
H
Re: Burma: CODEL Webb meeting with Aung San Suu Kyi
B6"
81;Done
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sunday, August 16, 2009 10:13 AM
H
Re: Webb
And he's in bangkok. So 11 hours ahead. Can also talk tomorrow morning our time."
81;"Jake says you want to talk to sen webb today? What time would u like to set it up?
4"
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sunday, August 16, 2009 11:50 AM
H
Fw: Senator Webb Press Comments read-out"
81;Fyi
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sunday, July 19, 2009 12:05 PM
H
1.4(B)
1.4(D)
B1
Please pass to S:
07/19/2019
17n"
81;
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Wednesday, August 19, 2009 10:04 AM
H
Fw: 3 militants die on eve of Afghan presidential vote"
81;
81;
81;"We were going to hang them all and put them in closet when u guys were out. But we can just bring bags and leave
them in room somewhere."
81;"I can set this up thru ops if u want to call.
The Secretary's Call Sheet for
Iraqi Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zebari
Purpose of Call: To express your condolences regarding the deaths of Iraqi MFA personnel in the August 19 attack on
the Iraqi Foreign Ministry.
MI want to personally express my heartfelt condolences to you for the savage attack on the Iraqi Ministry of Foreign
Affairs today and for the tragic loss of so many Iraqi lives around Baghdad and particularly at the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs.
al I remember fondly our meeting at the MFA in April — I was proud to be the first senior U.S. official to attend a meeting
there, and I was deeply saddened to hear that your Ministry was attacked.
DI This is a trying day for Iraqis and the Government of Iraq, but brutal attacks like these only deepen the need for
dedicated Iraqi like you and those in your Ministry, to remain committed to the new Iraq.
1:11 Know that the United States will continue to stand by Iraq as it faces these challenges.
Background: On Wednesday, August 19, what appears to be a series of VBIED and additional rocket attacks in Baghdad
resulted in the bloodiest day in Baghdad since the June 30 withdrawal of U.S. forces from urban areas. Although exact
numbers have not been confirmed, media is reporting that approximately 75 people were killed across Baghdad with
over 100 injuries. The most devastating attack appears to have been against the Iraqi MFA, where a VBIED was
exploded in front of the main gate. Zebari's Chief of Staff estimated that there were 35-40 fatalities and up to 40
injuries resulting from this attack, with 70% of the building damaged. In April, you were the first senior U.S. official to
hold a meeting at the MFA. Deputy Foreign Minister Labid Abbawi, who attended your meeting at the MFA and who's
wife led your meeting with Iraqi war widows, was reportedly slightly injured and quite shaken by the attack. He may
have lost a number of staff members. At this point, we do not know if other senior-ranking MFA officials were killed or
wounded in the attack."
81;
81;I already told them to plan on calling chris hill first. So let me start the process. Calling soon is good.
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Wednesday, August 19, 2009 2:12 PM
H
Fw: (AP) Baghdad Update"
81;281
81;291
81;"didn't call me back yesterday.
Will call her again today.
s fine for wednesday visit."
81;"Also, jim Jones just called for you. Can be non-secure
°
70S"
81;"Jim just called me.
Angela has some thing you need to see before tomorrow that she cannot leave.
She's scheduled to be there at 10.
Marina knows.
296"
81;"Philippe got final edits
You will have no later than 11:30"
81;"No word back from kristy but I told her 7am Karine and barbara will be there at 7:15.
Call reminders: holbrooke and moratinos.
79Q"
81;"Tom shannon passed on the below points:
The Honduran Armed Forces released a statement late last evening. It makes the following points:
- The Armed Forces respect the Constitution and the laws and reaffirms its subordination to civil authority in conformity
with law and obedience.
- As an institution, the Armed Forces backs a solution to the crisis Honduras faces through a process of negotiation in
the framework of the San Jose Accords.
- Accordingly, we reiterate our unrestricted support for the results of the same, in accordance with the Constitution and
laws.
- The Armed Forces as an institution will continue to fulfill the missions given it to it by the Constitutions and the laws of
Honduras."
81;"Kristy out of town.
Karine and barbara at 715
1n1"
81;302
81;"I've reached out to chris. Haven't reached him yet.
Zebari is up north only with cell phone access and lines are congested so we haven't been able to get him on. But the
foreign ministry knows u r trying to reach him."
81;Fyi
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sunday, July 26, 2009 12:21 PM
H
Fw: for HRC"
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Wednesday, August 19, 2009 2:39 PM
H
Fw: (AP) Pakistan PM effectively rules out treason charges"
81;"Holbrooke asking to talk sometime this am.
Isabelle 715
329"
81;
81;"There are a few things on there way to you this morning:
- call sheet for aliyev for today. Phil has discussed with you but its to urge him not to derail the turkey/armenia talks.
They are 9 hours ahead. Can we do soon?
-your schedule for the next few days. just need final sign off from you.
- a lona memo with questions for the next few weeks."
81;We have reached out to Aliyev
81;2
81;the next 30 min?
81;"in the next 30 min?
Its at 11:45. Ops is building. I'm on my way."
81;"It was taping in chicago today so it won't be airing same day. I thought you were excellent, and had great chemistry with
lisa. I know pir heard the audio. Not sure that melanne has yet."
81;"I'm on my way to your house to drop off:
- schedule for tomorrow. Marianne at 630am. Isabelle at 8am. Catherine coming monday.
- also dropped off some work folders which includes africa info.
- jim steinberg wants to talk tonite. Doesn't need to be secure.
- its 13 people coming tomorrow, I've worked it out with marina and doug
350"
81;"Wanted to let you know I decided to go to dc for the wh iftar tonite and big unga meeting tomorrow morning.
10"
81;His conference is oct 20-22nd. Given that its potentially between 2 big trips, we haven't done anything about it yet.
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Thursday, August 20, 2009 10:35 AM
H
Fw: U.S. group tells Sudan to speed up vote preparations"
81;"Abbas call confirmed forlorn.
Pdb is coming at 830"
81;"with the Secretary
Can they call the house?"
81;"Jeff wanted you to know before you 1pm abbas call:
1.4(B
1.4(D
B1
— Declassify on: 10/02/2024"
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Thursday, August 20, 2009 7:53 PM
H
Fw: Russia to help Ecuador develop nuclear energy"
81;"The photog will shoot you when you return and are getting out of car.
Come up to 7, not straight to 8.
44"
81;The cafeteria, sitting in the outside courtyard Hes excited about that
81;Its what I do well!
81;
81;"Holbrooke and eikenberry want to talk about elections. They want to do secure. Can u give me a time that works for you
to talk?"
81;Shouldn't be a problem.
81;
81;Haven't gotten confirmation yet on call.
81;"Also fyi, we heard eikenberry is going on sunday shows.
Holbrooke sent a memo as well that we can send over a secure fax if you'd like. Just need to know what time works for
you to receive the fax."
81;He can talk now. We can send secure fax now. And then connect call.
81;"Secure fax coming now.
Eikenberry call will have to be on yellow phone. They will call u on it there."
81;"They actually dont have the holbrooke memo. Potus is on with eikenberry now. They are going to test the yellow phone
right now so it will ring but u can ignore it. Will let you know when they are setting up call.
Ina"
81;Yes. Its a nice photo. It could just be someone with a good camera standing on their lawn.
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Thursday, September 17, 2009 10:23 AM
H
Fw: (Reuters) Polish PM says he, Obama discuss closer security ties"
81;
81;"Clips should be coming thru now
Also, on the espinosa call, she asked to talk before the OAS meeting next week. talking points from WHA will be faxed
right after clips.
I
1 na"
81;"Connecting now
Doesn't need to be secure
1117"
81;72
81;"My email is Aping strange. sorry
Speech has been faxed
Foi. tomorrow:"
81;"9nm.
Griginal Message
Fro : H <HDR22@clintonemail.corri>
To: Abedin, Huma
r;lu Sep 17 21:46:38 2009
Subject: Re: Notes
the. p!nn,tcrnorrnw ntrh.t?
C;(0(.6;;
Abedin, <Abedinfl@state.gov>
Yo:
Sep 17 2.:4:5:01 2005
koy,
Speech has been faxed
For t,Jazirrciw:"
81;
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Friday, September 18, 2009 10:03 AM
H
Fw: 9/18 Senior Staff Meeting
BEST COPY
AVAILABLE
FINNIC Smith, Daniel 13
'fi7;s: Mills, Cheryl D; Abedin, Huma; Sulivari,2,ac:ot
Sth'd: Fri Sep 18 09:58:17 2009
9/18 Senior Staff Meeting
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED
CONGRESSIONAL OUTREACH
lack Esiel .p
het 7111the ite:;.1ere:..-iy to Congresswoman. Lowey seems to have had a positive impact. She
s‘V c:i.e..i.for.:al:de with the Pakistan energy reprogramming because she fears it will turn out to be a much
biggte ppe,;eet, but api:..eree11y u/iil not ebiect to the immediate request for reprogramming.
Jeck ricaeci the i•eeed or more outreach to Congressman Obey, adding that he is using the Vietnam analogy to
rfar t., fhr citP/PtiOn fry Affx1Wlirt.Pr more and more. Anne-Marie said that this is becoming much more
:„irdespvesci arn.e7ng Democrats on the Hill, pointing especially to Senator Kerry.
lilt idea of S t.0 ';:;Ei(i.ittCor Leahy to i'lag our concerns about cuts to food security, Pakistan FMF
iiftd Mefitie assistance to iviexico. jack suggested we needed to get our priorities straight, and that he would
pee_ionaliy press hardest Pak FMF and iViexico. Rich said he had a 9:30 call in to Nisha Desai on Lowey's staff
and that this might clarify where things stand.
3:.1"". ne cal: C:origressman Obey to discuss assistance to Palau, noting that Secretary
Saiaildi• has already weighed in. Rich agreed, but said Dan Fried is very concerned about the signal that will be
sent w countries thinking of taking detainees from GTMO if assistance to Palau is cut.
thi:e. the SF.'_.vtutaty's Hill briefings on refugees had gone well yesterday, and that she made
progt ess w,th Senator Schumer on pressing for a resolution of the New York property issue and the opening of a
,,:c:ietlete
Iran: ,:e Aqtr
'..ask en infe memo to the Secretary on the UNDP and Iran issue to make certain she is up to
on this.
reported that No Daalder had done a good job in the NATO briefing on Missile Defense yesterday, though
the Poles and Czechs remain unhappy. PA commented that the story had ""turned"" substantially once the
?resident, Gates and others had weighed in. Everyone remains puzzled by the Wall Street Journal leak and
whether that was deliberate. It definitely complicated things.
Goldstone Report
O There was discussion of the need to get the Secretary the latest guidance on Goldstone before her speech this
:Thebe noted had concerns about our press guidance on Goldstone, noting that we are
eerilzbpierenie when ;t comes to the. human Rights Council mandate. On the one hand, we criticize the
bac of, the other we insist that the mandate requires the report be kept in the HRC. The best
liliri k to not cite tree mandate as the reason for keeping the discussion in the HRC; instead, we should just
tuft ';:hat we favor keeping the discussion there and leave it at that.
Legal Issues
.eportet..s -nere wil9 likely 'be a settlement Monday in the Knox Case against the Palestinian
ti ill '; tV
• Hartle:, ;lotted war L and C2-', would send l'orward a memo to Son the Abbot child custody case before the
::,•uprerree Court where we are arguing the need to adhere to the Hague Convention on Child Abductions and
. ;:turn a child to Chile because this is best for the child and because we are so often arguing on behalf of
wh•ese e'lildren have been taken abroad.
Nominee
i-6ch sail six nominees had been reported out of the SFRC yesterday — Hormats, Posner, Lee Feinstein, Jacobson
beini tWorwayi, and Solornunt (Spain).
Gration
• f' c:! 27, • e he: ds-ue tliet Seet.:: Gra ',en is planning to do media interviews next week."
81;"Thx
Few other notes:
- wh is asking if u want to speak with potus tomorrow during the meeting time? Would be 10:20am. Would you like to
do a call with him or wait and meet with him in petson?
- cdm can explain the document I just asked oscar to print for you."
81;Tuesday we think.
81;
81;Yes we have asked wh for a time
81;"Cc: Oscar Flores
You should leave at 10am tomorrow for 1pm shuttle."
81;Ok we can make that work.
81;
81;"Indonesians cannot do 9. Asking for 10am instead. Philippines will likely be right after.
Hope that's ok."
81;"Eikenberry has asked if u can talk at 9am?
Then philippines 9:45 and indonesia immediately after.
Ok?"
81;On secure
81;
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Tuesday, September 1, 2009 4:09 PM
H
Re:"
81;
81;We hadn't gathered people yet only cause jake and cdm hadn't said to move forward But checking in now
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Tuesday, September 1, 2009 4:21 PM
H
Re:"
81;Confirmed that oscar is at house.
81;We are making reservations
81;Message from scott gration
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Friday, August 21, 2009 6:51 PM
H
Fw: Tom Harkin
I never got a call sheet. See traffic below which has some info on what she's interested in doing."
81;"Just hearing oas conf starts sunday.
Would u be willing to talk to espinosa tomorrow?
17fi"
81;Also, steinmeier called for you. We are getting call sheet.
81;Ok we will follow up.
81;"John podesta just returned from spending time with bachelet in chile. Would like to talk to you about his trip.
cell B6
128"
81;"Espinosa confirmed for 10am
170"
81;She has been confirmed for 10am.
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, August 22, 2009 9:59 AM
H
Fw: (WSJ)- German government awaits outcome of GM board of directors meeting"
81;
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, August 22, 2009 12:01 PM
H
Fw: (Reuters) Germany's Steinmeier proposes Afghan pull-out talks"
81;"Will check
I know melanne moved forward after she discussed with you. Will see if people can change to dinner."
81;1/7
81;
81;"Strobe talbott says he's expecting a call from you 10am. He gave all his numbers to ops if u want to call thru them.
145"
81;"tickets shouldnt be a problem, just put request in.
its about 45 min from chappaqua and starts at 8pm."
81;
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sunday, August 23, 2009 9:17 AM
H
Fw: South Korea's Lee meets North Korean delegation (AP)"
81;RudmanM@state.gov
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, October 10, 2009 6:13 AM
H 1.4(B)
1.4(D)
B1
S/E Mitchell spoke to EGIS Chief Omar Solimon on October 5, 2009.
10/10/2024"
81;
81;
81;TO HOLD RUN-OFF
81;
81;"Also, if we move the female heads of state lunch to a dinner, we lose almost all of the heads of state and several fms. Do
u want to keep as a lunch? Or move to a dinner and make it women foreign ministers?
Oscar says fax machine is down but he has clips for today and weekend he should have printed."
81;"Brazilian fm asking to talk to you this afternoon about honduras. He prefers later in afternoon. We are getting a call
sheet for you."
81;Tom Harkin asking to talk to you. Called directly. Didn't leave subject.
81;I have not been able to reach oscar this am. We are supposed to send the pdb at 11. Can u receive it?
81;"Pdb coming now
And talking points for potential call this weekend with shimon peres. I believe mitchell discussed with you"
81;"ABOUT.
Hrc also has background from last week. But this looks like an update."
81;
81;I have a cell that has changed. Tracking down new one
81;fyi
81;
81;"Rahms assistant is asking for your email address. U want me to give him?
RS"
81;"Fyi - the 730am michelleti call hasn't been confirmed yet. We offered the time but haven't heard back. Hopefully we will
know in the morning before 7am."
81;You can ignore earlier email. Micheletti just confirmed.
81;Joe lieberman wants to talk to you about his recent trip to iraq and afghanistan with mccain.
81;Did u get memo on arab donor support? Do u approve?
81;Thai 00000000000000
81;"Oops my email acting up.
Eap is asking you to call Thai foreign minister kasit regarding the case of the russian arms dealer viktor bout. Are you ok
doing this call in the next day or so?
Below is call sheet and I also faxed to the house.
Purpose of Call: To underscore the importance we place on a the Royal Thai Government's successful appeal of the
court decision rejecting the extradition of Russian arms dealer Viktor Bout to the United States and the importance of
his continued detention pending the outcome of the appeal.
Background: On August 11, 2009, a Thai judge denied a U.S. extradition request of accused arms smuggler Viktor Bout
(pron: BOOT) to face trial in New York for conspiracy to kill U.S. nationals and officers; acquire and use anti-aircraft
missiles; and provide material support to the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC). The Thai Attorney
General's Office will appeal the ruling. FM Kasit has been a strong ally on Burma and released a forward-leaning
Chairman's statement on behalf of ASEAN following ASSK's conviction."
81;What do u want to do about kennedy? Statement or letter?
81;"Holbrooke asking to talk to as soon as possible.
Also can u do secure mitchell call at 10:30?"
81;They will call the secure ste on 3rd floor at 10:30.
81;
81;"This is kennedy statement about to go out. Will be joint from u and wjc.
Senator Ted Kennedy was one of the most important and influential leaders of our time, whose five decades as Senator
from Massachusetts helped to shape America's history and chart our shared future. During our time in the White
House, we were thankful for his fierce advocacy and support for universal health care and his work to provide health
coverage to low-income children. Without his tireless efforts, America would not be as close to achieving health care
reform as we are today.Continuing the legacy left by his older brothers, his lifelong pursuit of civil rights and justice for
all moved America forward to form a more perfect union. But beyond his death, his legacy of public service will live on in
millions of young people across our nation who now have the chance to serve through the Edward M. Kennedy Serve
America Act, which will expand AmeriCorps and other youth service opportunities. He loved his country, his wife Vicki,
and his incredible children and grandchildren. We are proud to have known him, worked alongside him, and called him
our friend. Our thoughts and prayers are with his family and the people of Massachusetts during this difficult time."
81;None. They are saying to be announced.
81;"Ban is in a meeting. They will call back as soon as he is out.
We are waiting to hear back from the thais."
81;Ok.
81;"Ban can talk at 2:45
U want to do that?"
81;"White house saying they have have heard the funeral may be Saturday morning around 10:00 am in Boston. There
would be a Celebration of Life event Friday night at the JFK Library.
Will get u more info as I get it.
.."
81;We'll work on it.
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Wednesday, August 26, 2009 5:12 PM
H
kathleen B6
'"
81;"Kerry
Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Wednesday, August 26, 2009 5:13 PM
H"
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Wednesday, August 26, 2009 7:21 PM
H
Vicky kennedv lust called the office back for wjc. Said the message meant a great deal to her. If you want to call her, she
is at:"
81;Yes
81;F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05764566 Date: 07/31/2015
81;"Will do.
Mccain also called wjc office today asking to come to cgi."
81;Also, steinmeir asking to talk to u about afghanistan either today between 3:30 and 4. Or tomorrow afternoon.
81;
81;"- Jim Jones wants to talk to you as soon as you are free. Can be non secure.
- jimmy carter called for you. Did not leave subject
- peres confirmed for 12:45."
81;Griginal Message
81;111A
81;
81;Phil wanted you to see before your turkish call.
81;Lavrov asking to talk between now and 11am. He didn't leave a topic.
81;Benita ferraro waldner just called again about UNESCO election in Paris.
81;"Oscar, I've sent hrc a lot of emails on calls. Can you send her this summary with latest info?
- benita ferraro waldner called about UNESCO election in Paris. Esther brimmer is returning.
-lavrov wants to talk before llam.
- nalbandian call: sending you a all sheet and phil is hoping you will make this call today."
81;Are you willing to call nalbandian today? See phils note below and we also have a call sheet coming your way.
81;Oscar pls print for hrc. She's expecting it.
81;
81;"Strange. Meeting was confirmed several days ago. In fact, her office called back to say it was the only time that worked
for her. Its at 7pm on the 24th."
81;
81;"Fyi
Philippe and michael turner will be at first stop Ill meet you with pam mills at second stop
119"
81;
81;I understand cherly forwarded you the unga demarche points Do you have edits to them?
81;
81;"taking jan off
we have been talking to wjc team about a dinner friday night post cgi (that i believe you and wjc discussed) and if we do
that, we can include her there.
you should know that barbra striesand and jim brolin have also askedif you and wjc want to have dinner friday night if
you are interested. her performance is sat night"
81;"does it make sense to do it every monday so you have your series of meetings the top of the week and then people can
get direction for the week?"
81;"Don't think oscar was able to get this to you before you left. Its a few ny notes from chris falvo before the school event:
TO: Secretary Clinton
FROM: Chris Falvo
DATE: September 8, 2009
RE: NY Local Issues
Schools - NYC public schools open on Wednesday, September 9th. As a result, you will be visiting a charter school that
opened a couple of weeks ago instead of a public school. Mike Mulgrew, who took over as President of the UFT when
Randi left for AFT, will be present at the event and should be acknowledged in your remarks. His aides who you have
met numerous times, Dick Riley and Bridget Rein, will also be present. Mike appointed Dick as his press secretary last
month.
H1N1 - Mayor Bloomberg did a rollout earlier this week on NYC's plans to handle this health concern, and a significant
portion discusses schools. Unlike what was done in the Spring, this time closing schools will be a last resort. Reason is
that they found kids still contaminate each other by going to movies and playgrounds when the schools are closed, so
instead they are asking sick kids to stay home.
And if four percent of a student body experiences the flu on a single day, a doctor will visit to monitor the situation.
Every student in a NYC school will be offered free H1N1 flu shots or mist once a vaccine is available.
Primary day - September 15th is primary day. In addition to Bill Thompson for Mayor, the primary races that have been
closely followed are Public Advocate and City Comptroller. Running for Public Advocate are Councilmember Eric Gioia,
Councilmember Bill DeBlasio, former Public Advocate Mark Green, and civil rights lawyer Norman Siegel. Running for
Comptroller are four Councilmembers: John Lui, Melinda Katz, David Yassky, and David Weprin.
Rangel - As of last week House Speaker Pelosi plans to allow Rep. Rangel to keep his chairmanship of the Ways and
Means Committee despite his ethics problems. According to amended forms recently filed with the House, Rangel failed
to disclose at least $800,000 in assets and income since 2002. This comes amid a House ethics investigation into his
failure to report income from and pay taxes on a villa in the Dominican Republic and his ties to a real-estate developer
who leased him four rent-stabilized apartments in New York. The panel is also looking into Rangel's fundraising and
whether he improperly used his office to raise money for a public policy center in his name at the City University of New
York. Rangel has denied any wrongdoing and says its accounting mistakes and simple oversights. The NY Post and
Buffalo News have called for his resignation. Speaking at a health-care forum in Washington Heights last Tuesday, Rangel
said that bias and prejudice toward Obama are fueling opposition to health-care reform. ""Some Americans have not
gotten over the fact that Obama is president of the United States. They go to sleep wondering, 'How did this happen?' ""
Rangel said. Rangel then likened the battle over health-care expansion for the uninsured to the fight for civil rights.
""Why do we have to wait for the right to vote? Why can't we get what God has given us? That is the right to live as
human beings and not negotiate with white southerners and not count the votes. Just do the right thing,"" he said. After
the forum, Rangel insisted he was not smearing opponents as racists. ""What I'm saying is, if you watch the town-hall
meetings, people were angry and did not care what the answer was to some of their questions. They were angry with
their member of Congress, period,"" he said. Rangel's comments came less than two weeks after Governor Paterson
claimed he has been the victim of a racist white media -- and also suggested that opposition to Obama's plan is racially
driven. The White House disagreed with Paterson's comments.
120
Little League World Series - Staten Island's little league team, the South Shore Nationals, made it to the Little League
World Series, but they lost the title two weeks ago with a 4-1 loss to the Southwest Regional Champs, McAllister Park
American, from San Antonio.
9/11 - Jay Winuk, founder of the My Good Deed organization, and brother of 9/11 victim, Glenn Winuk, notified us that
DOJ has finally award his brother the 9/11 Heroes Medal of Valor. You were very supportive of Jay's efforts and wrote
letters to DOJ. Glenn worked at a law firm near the WTC, but was also a volunteer FF. After helping to evacuate his
building he went to the WTC area to help and unfortunately died when the South Tower fell. Senator Schumer and Rep
Pete King held a press conference on Tuesday making the announcement at a park named in Glenn's honor in their
hometown of Jericho, Long Island. Fyi, Jay will be at Friday's 9/11 Servicenation event.
121"
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Tuesday, September 08, 2009 9:13 AM
H
Fw: (Reuters) Partial results show Karzai winning Afghan poll"
81;"we have 2 rooms with 2 set ups.
one at a conference table and one with sofas chairs etc for the middle eastern ones. but we can change and make both
at a conference table. please let me know if you want to do it that way"
81;
81;"that is right
Esther will keep sending updates"
81;"Can you call into ops for him now?
He says its time-sensitive and can be on non-secure line.
127"
81;
81;
81;
81;1 A
81;ALMOST 3 MONTHS - SENIOR AIDE
81;"He called again. At home
277"
81;
81;Importance: High
81;He's in the hamptons fyi. We walked by his place yesterday.
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;Importance: High
81;Ok
81;
81;
81;
81;Fm moratinos just called for you. Wants to talk about honduras. I'm tracking down torn for an update for you.
81;Tom needs to update you before you talk to moratinos. So will connect torn to house, and then moratinos after? Ok?
81;
81;
81;From esther
81;"As I mentioned to you last night, lauren reports he can talk anytime after 1pm today. Or anytime tomorrow. U need to
let us know when."
81;"I'm back, just waiting for elevator.
Let me know if you need notes."
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, August 29, 2009 12:06 PM
H
Fw: Truck bombs kill 16 people in Iraq (AP)"
81;We'll follow up.
81;"U asked who he met with today:
Montenegrin Prime Minister Djukanovic
Croatian Foreign Minister Jandrokovic
Cypriot FM Kyprianou
Serbian Foreign Minister Jeremic
Swedish Foreign Minister Bildt
Bosnian President Silajdzic
Macedonian President Ivanov"
81;Ok.
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, August 29, 2009 4:57 PM
H
Fw: (Nytimes) U.S. Accuses Pakistan of Altering Missiles
B6"
81;"For oprah, Monday is better. rm going to confirm for chappaqua monday.
Oscar, can u make sure she sees this?
327"
81;"The best option for ban for the food security meeting is saturday afternoon at 4pm. Cheryl wants to confirm. U ok if I
move forward?"
81;"Lisa ling.
She's an oprah correspondant. we can do late monday afternoon so u don't have to be rushed getting out of here.
Maybe offer her 3 or 4pm?
Will get a makeup person."
81;"The dates are tomorrow or monday.
Not next week. Its why I asked cheryl to discuss with you because it meant interrupting your vacation which I wasn't
prepared to do."
81;"Checking
I am sure they will
Mitchell just responded. He can talk before 10:30 tonite or before noon tomorrow. What do u want to do?"
81;"He's not calling you. Gave us windows he's available but does want to get a time so he's at a landline.
Oprah can do monday in the hamptons. You could just use house. Its close and will have good spaces to use."
81;Can we set up turkish fm call tomorrow?
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sunday, August 30, 2009 9:51 AM
H
Fw: Turkey-Armenia text for Davutoglu call
Phils response to delaying call tomorrow?
Would u like to do today?
Or jim can do today and u can follow up tomorrow?"
81;
81;"He can do 1:30
He's traveling in slovenia"
81;"Not yet cause I'm sure it will be fine
Oprahs people haven't confirmed they can do it in hamptons yet As soon as they do, I will call her"
81;I left u final call sheet last night on kitchen counter. Do u need another copy?
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sunday, August 30, 2009 1:02 PM
H
Re: Turkey-Armenia text for Davutoglu call
B6"
81;Ahmet
81;
81;They r standing by
81;
81;"Phil is
GordonPH@state.gov"
81;"Oprah just confirmed.
So we can do the following
- 9am kouchner call
- 9:30am Jones call
- 10am jack and cheryl call
- press briefing call for oprah
- will have hair and makeup come to house around 11.
- interview at lisa at around 12:30 or 1. Does that work? We can start whole daye later too."
81;"Cheryl is not ready for a secure call yet.
174"
81;"B6
Judiths best number
.zol"
81;"Susan rice would rather meet with you thurs So no call needed today
WWI"
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Monday, August 31, 2009 12:54 PM
H
B6"
81;"Tom harkin called office twice during
Cell:
Home:
AM"
81;"Cc: Oscar Flores
Senator kerry asking to talk.
As you know he is overseas. He's available this am. ops can connect whevenver u call in."
81;Jim steinberg asking to talk to you. He's at his office till 4 and then on cell. Ops can track him down whenever u r ready.
81;"There are 2 draft letters from mara being faxed to secure fax right now. Oscar will receive.
Also, norwegian fm stoere wants to talk tomorrow. He will be in aghanistan."
81;
81;Mitchell says he needs to talk asap.
81;Holbrooke and eikenberry asking if you can do a conference call with them.
81;"Ok its now going to be:
Ambassadors Eikenberry, Ricciardone, and tim Carney who's are all at embassy kabul."
81;Yes
81;They will.
81;Kerry is sleeping
81;"Can u do norwegian fm stoere today?
Hea apparently still in norway
Is free from 10am-6pm.
We have a call sheet to send you."
81;"Reached out to them.
Also faxing call sheet."
81;"Cc: Oscar Flores
Norwegian fm stoere set for 10am
Call sheet has been faxed"
81;"Left him a message
I don't think it will be a problem today but will doublecheck."
81;
81;"Confirmed with mario. Weather supposed to improve throughout the day. In fact he said, the later the better so we are
ok for the 9."
81;
81;He's reachable after 430pm
81;flight.
81;"I know we talked about no need for moc calls re sudan Rich is asking if u would do howard berman today. I sent sheet to
oscar if u want to do."
81;Just berman he said
81;
81;
81;14.0
81;"Below is a note from rick olson for UAE bilat today:
Madam Secretary:
Ambassador Holbrooke asked that I convey to you the gist of a conversation he and I had with
1.4(B)
1.4(D)
B1
Rick Olson
09/10/2024
169"
81;Karine will be there at 6:45 tomorrow.
81;"Karine at 7 instead.
Book just left office. Should be to u in 10 min."
81;
81;"We just hung up.
Checked on you but you were sleeping
If you want me to come give you download, I will be up for a while Otherwise, can talk in am."
81;Am sure u saw but just in case
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;"As a reminder, ehud barak called for you. Call sheet just came through. Its at house.
Also, pdb coming at 10am."
81;
81;"November 09, 2009
Samuel J. Heyman, who stood out as a corporate raider who preferred to hold on to companies he bought and run them
rather that sell them for a quick profit, died Sunday at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan. He was 70.
Mr. Heyman's death was confirmed by his wife, Ronnie, who said he had died after complications from open heart
surgery.
Mr. Heyman was most recently chairman of the GAF Corporation, a manufacturer of roofing materials, and a chemical
company that was spun off from GAF, called International Specialty Products. Both companies are based in Wayne, N.J.
A group led by Mr. Heyman bought GAF in 1983 and took it private in 1987 after the stock market crashed. He later spun
off GAF's chemical business into a separate company, I.S.P.
During that period, corporate raiders tended to buy companies, cut operational costs and then sell them at a profit. But
after Mr. Heyman won a battle with GAF's management for control of the company, he told The New York Times: ""There
is a very strong potential in chemicals, and we plan to make them grow.""
Mr. Heyman, who was also a lawyer, had diverse business holdings, including Heyman Properties, which owns shopping
malls in the Northeast and which grew out of a business he had inherited from his father.
""He was extremely methodical. There was a rhyme and reason to everything he did,"" said Leon Black, the chairman of
Apollo Management, a private equity firm, and a longtime friend who was once Mr. Heyman's investment banker.
Mr. Black added: ""He combined a strong legal background with a strong analytical business strength, and he was a fierce
negotiator. But what really made Sam kick was that he was a builder. It was all about building, whether it was his
companies, his real estate, his art collection or his family.""
Mr. Heyman was born March 1, 1939, in Danbury, Conn., to Annette and Lazarus Heyman. His father was a real estate
developer. After graduating from Yale in 1960 and Harvard Law School in 1964, Mr. Heyman went to work in the Justice
Department under Robert F. Kennedy and served as chief assistant United States attorney for Connecticut. He had to cut
that career short when his father needed him to take over the real estate development business.
Mr. Heyman made his biggest mark in the 1983 battle for GAF. A group of shareholders led by Mr. Heyman became
frustrated by management's resistance to selling some of its biggest assets, including the chemicals business.
Mr. Heyman waged an aggressive campaign against the company's chairman and ultimately forced his removal through
a shareholder vote - a rare victory for shareholders during a time when executives of public companies were considered
virtually untouchable.
Once Mr. Heyman took control of GAF, he reversed course and held on to the chemicals business, ultimately making it a
big contributor to the company's profit.
He also moved quickly to cut costs and revamp the business, saying at the time that he was an ""impatient man. When I
see a place where money can be saved, I don't waste time.""
Mr. Heyman also gave away money. In 1999, he founded the Partnership for Public Service, which provides fellowships
to encourage students to pursue careers in public service. For his charity work, Mr. Heyman won the President's Citizens
Award in 2008.
His other philanthropic interests included the establishment of the Samuel and Ronnie Heyman Center on Corporate
Governance at the Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law.
He and his wife also collected art. Among their holdings are works by Mark Rothko and Jackson Pollock.
In addition to his wife, the former Ronnie Feuerstein, Mr. Heyman is survived by his mother, Annette Heyman of Palm
Beach, Fla.; four children, Lazarus Heyman, Eleanor Propp, Jennifer Millstone and Elizabeth Winter; and nine
grandchildren."
81;
81;
81;
81;"Its midnight here.
U have someone coming at 7.
We don't need to leave till 8:15 or 8:30.
Will do pre-brief in am
I'm coming up now."
81;"We are doing letter
Also have a number if you want to call
Wjc is supposed to call as well."
81;Confirmed wjc still in dem caucus lunch
81;
81;B6
81;
81;Another note from milliband that he doesn't want to send through the system.
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, November 21, 2009 4:55 PM
H
Fw: Call to Chinese FM Yang
See below
Bill burns is asking if you would call yang
We can send you formal call sheet and set up call if you want."
81;
81;Tony blair asking if you are free to talk tomorrow (sunday) at 12:30?
81;"No word back from chinese on his availability.
Blair will be fine with that."
81;"Yang on travel
Not free tonite.
May work tomorrow"
81;Richards office sending a secure fax tomorrow morning at 8:30am.
81;Tony blair is confirmed for 12:45 today. Ops will connect to house.
81;
81;
81;"Also, assume you are giving any edits to documents directly to richard? Ops called to see if you were going to send edits
back thru secure fax. I assume you are not."
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;tomorrow.
81;
81;"roy spence asked if u would say hello and take a picture with his friends. Its not john wren but someone else who works
at omni corn and his wife. Can we do later today in lobby on way out to airport?
Also, cathy hall is in town too. Also asking if she can say hello and thought we could do the same. What do u think?"
81;
81;"You should leave soon. They confirmed they are starting on time at 8pm.
Yang confirmed for 10:30. Ops will connect to the house."
81;"Not sure where you went but wjc tried to reach you.
He's now in with netanyahu.
Will call back when he's done."
81;
81;"Jake, capricia, philippe and I going to
Left u note upstairs.
Cdm wants u to call.
Leaving eikenberry memo for u."
81;Will also print
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Tuesday, December 1, 2009 7:13 PM
H
We left message for suozzi.
He's supposed to be home after 5:30. And reachable at"
81;That will be hard unless you leave white house early.
81;"Here is rasmussen statement at press conf today:
On behalf of NATO, I warmly welcome President Obama's announcement on the new US approach and commitment to
the mission in Afghanistan. President Obama's decision to substantially increase the numbers of US forces in the NATO-
led operation is proof of his resolve; the overall approach he laid out is a broader political strategy for success. The
United States' contribution to the NATO-led mission has always been substantial; it is now even more important.But this
is not a US mission alone: America's Allies in NATO have shared the risks, costs and burdens of this mission from the
beginning. As the US increases its commitment, I am confident that the other Allies, as well as our Partners in the
mission, will also make a substantial increase in their contribution. Taken together, the new force contributions from
across the Alliance, as well as the new approach agreed by all the ISAF countries, will help create a new momentum in
the mission in 2010."
81;"Jack lew is sending a note to you tonight about 2010 budget passback. he's hoping you will be able to review tonite. And
is available to discuss with you.
Will get to you as soon as its ready."
81;Peres call confirmed for 8:30am.
81;Richard hoibrooke asking to speak to you. Says he's available till 9am.
81;"We tentatively told the plane 9nm wheels up. Do u want to leave earlier? Later?
1P4"
81;Changing to 10. Not a problem.
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, September 12, 2009 10:18 AM
H
Re: Tonite
Ill think of a place.
Mitchell can talk secure from plane. They will call your secure phone soon."
81;
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, September 12, 2009 10:02 AM
H
They just reached mitchell on plane. He will call back soon.
1.67"
81;wife is
81;Yes its actually mitchells phone on plane that's having the problem. They r reconnecting to his plane and trying u again.
81;Mitchell calling one more time now.
81;"Yes no problem to take the van
III meet you at la guardia"
81;Yes, we can. Melanne would be happy to hear that!
81;"Arnold schwarzenegger called for you. Assume its about his climate change conference which we have regretted to his
stff.
Ops has his contact info
f.31"
81;"Near you, there is a palena on connecticut which is rated one of the best restaurants in dc. Use fresh local produce for
everything.
There's also bourbon steak in the four seasons. They have some quiet booths and the food is really good."
81;she likes.
81;
81;John kerry trying to reach you.
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;"Huma Abedin
Sunday, September 13, 2009 8:07 AM
'SullivanJJ@state.gov'
RELEASE IN PART
B6
III do so now."
81;Importance: Low
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sunday, September 13, 2009 8:09 AM
H
Mitchell asking to talk to you after your white house meeting fyi."
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sunday, September 13, 2009 8:17 AM
H
Holbrooke says he needs to talk to you before wh mtg.
21:13"
81;Non secure
81;
81;"Secretary Clinton Host
Mr. Les Moonves CBS
Mrs. Christine Schwarzman Benefit Committee
Mr. Matthew Cowles Artists Committee Guest (Baranski)
Ms. Mimi O'Donnell Artists Committee Guest (Hoffman)
Mr. Frank Langella Artists Committee
Ms. Christine Baranski Artists Committee
Mr. Stephen Schwarzman KC Chairman
Ms. Barbara Walters Artists Committee Guest (Langella)
Mr. Philip Seymour Hoffman Artists Committee
Ms. Julie Chen CBS
Mr. Edward Albee Former Honoree"
81;-
81;
81;Fyi
81;
81;"Jack is having 7pm dinner at fairfax hotel with eikenberry and petreaus which is right down the street from u on mass
avenue. Monica can make make sure u get in ok if u want to go."
81;
81;
81;Ok
81;Fyi
81;This is what you should have lust gotten
81;Marina told me she left. I'm faxing to secret service. Dan will make sure u get it
81;
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sunday, January 17, 2010 12:53 PM
H
1pm call manifest
We now have confirmed participation by Brazil/Amorim; France/Kouchner; Haiti/PM; Chile, Uruguay, Peru at ministerial
level; Argentina, Mexico, and Costa Rica at Vice Min level. UN has committed to high-level participation as well,"
81;"There are a few things I sent to oscar to print:
- revised AfPak strategy overview memo that came from holbrookes office.
- prep paper from rich for testimony next week.
-a draft copy of the action memo and report on Kerry-Lugar-Berman that Jake wanted you to see this weekend. the
final package will be in dc Sunday night. The report is due to Congress on Monday."
81;Yes will do.
81;"Contacting with wha now. Frattini would have to cancel his trip so we would have to re-schedule for another date or just
do in context of one of these multilateral meetings. He has a big speech in italy on the 26th."
81;"III confirm if he'll be there for london.
As for paris, looks like sarkozy will be there but we won't know for sure till tomorrow. So it would mean sarkozy meeting,
speech and kouchner around 6pm when he's back from davos."
81;Checking.
81;Readouts from all your calls r going to the relevant people.
81;"List we are reaching out to:
Saudi
Italy
Poland
Romania
Spain
France
Netherlands
Australia
Canada
Norway
Denmark
Sweden
Japan
South Korea"
81;
81;"Hrc miliband called asking to talk today about climate change/copenhagen. Said he was calling many of his counterparts
today. Below are points. Oscar also has and can print. Ops can connect.
The Secretary's Call with British FM David Miliband
Climate Change Points:
COP15 Negotiation Update:"
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sunday, December 13, 2009 3:16 PM
Syrian presidents brother
You ok with this condolence cable for syrian president assad? He brother died after a long illness.
Dear Mr. President:
Sincerely yours,"
81;"Yes taking shuttle with you
Was going to take train to usss party but with weather and luggage, will just meet u at Iga. All shuttles delayed 30
minutes."
81;Can we do a 7pm speech call?
81;"Call sheets will be coming on secure fax at 8am.
Here are confirmed calls:
830: Japanese FMinister Okada
845: French FMinister Kouchner
900: Polish FMinister Sikorski
915: Canadian FMinister Cannon
930: Brazilian FMinister Amorim
945: Romanian President Basescu
1000: Norwegian FM Stoere
1015: Italian FM Frattini
1030: Possible Saudi FM
1045: Dutch FMinister Verhagen
1100: Spanish FMinister Moratinos"
81;
81;We have given them windowns. As soon as you are done the next one will be connected.
81;"Amazing job on the calls!
U r done after this minus romania which we won't pursue any more Saudi might be available at 12:45 and if u r ok, we
can do it then."
81;
81;Did u take your earpiece or do I need to get it?
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;Will get u full update. B6
81;"Below is the update as of last night. But I'm trying to see what else we can do to help expedite. I talked to last
night and she said I . was in touch with 2 state department staff yesterday and was grateful for their assistance and
for constantly staying in touch.
Getting u an update from today but as of last night:
There has been very close coordination among Consular Affairs, Embassy Kathmandu
and Consulate Chengdu.
I"
81;Yes, I saw that. Trying to get some more info now.
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sunday, September 27, 2009 1:31 PM
H
Latest on
It is a national holiday in Nepal now, and Embassy Kathmandu is closed on Monday
and Tuesday, but they will clearly come in to help expedite the transportation of the remains back to the U.S. Post has
already alerted those involved with preparing remains to be on stand by.
We will reiterate to everyone involved the need to do everything possible to expedite the return of the remains to the
U.S., and to inform us of any obstacles. Thus far, we have not heard of any."
81;
81;"Lisa is coming at 7:15 tomorrow.
Will you come to nyc in time for first bilat?"
81;"Yes at 10.
Was checking to see if I needed to make arrangements for you to do anything earlier."
81;"Let me check in.
Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sunday, September 27, 2009 6:50 PM
H
Re: Checking in"
81;
81;
81;See first point on israel. Lieberman put a call into you early this am. Suspect it was about this.
81;Looks like isn't back in ny yet.
81;
81;"Huma Abedin <
Sunday, December 20, 2009 9:35 AM
'ValmoroU@state.gov'
Flights
Mario suggests we check in with him in the afternoon about 8pm flight. Basically he said flight may get canceled at last
minute as has happened with shuttles this morning. He will check with crew who will give him best assesment."
81;
81;
81;
81;will call him now
81;
81;
81;"and...
III be sure to find him for you."
81;
81;"Just checked in with mara. She says
Daniel Rubinstein, our Jerusalem CG, is seeing Abbas at 2pm their time, so will have a report to us by 3pm (they are 6
hours ahead, so 9am for us) -- so we will know then whether or not a call from you to him makes sense."
81;"Iona and i wanted to give you an update on travel both alonzo and mario are recommending against travel today reagan
is still closed until this afternoon per alonzo.
mario is holding seats on 7am tomorrow.
as for trains, i talked to amtrak, they have trains running, some approx 1 hour behind schedule and a couple have
canceled but they are running today.
lona will be hearing from melanne in the next few hours or so about whether event will be on or canceled tomorrow.
will keep you updated"
81;
81;"Kurt campbell is asking if you would do a quick pull aside with Japanese Ambassador Fujisaki tomorrow. Kurt would do
meeting, and would bring him by for a few minutes. Pls let me know what you think.
Points he sent:"
81;Thx.
81;She's not coming. She's out of town.
81;"The only calls we didn't get done were:
Danish FM Moller
Swedish FM Bildt
Korean FM Yu
South African FM Mashabane
Do you want to make them tomorrow?"
81;
81;
81;"Checked with philippe on plane and he said hes professionally 100% ok for following reasons.
1)We did it for Copenhagen.
2) Condi would be dropped in Crawford on way home from foreign trips.
3) They already know and don't care.
But let me know if you want to change to dc, and I can easily tell Lew."
81;
81;Yes.
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;"Subject: Latest on Goldman Decision
Ops just passed us the following on latest developments in the Goldman case, courtesy of our Embassy in Brasilia:
-- David Goldman's Brazilian lawyer and the family's attorney are currently attempting to negotiate a ""voluntary return.""
--If those talks fail, Goldman will request the Brazilian police execute the involuntary return ordered yesterday by a
Brazilian judge. This outcome would create a negative PR climate.
--Brazilian police ""think"" they know the boy's whereabouts.
--Return to US likely will occur on an NBC News-chartered aircraft, as Goldman has inked some sort of exclusive deal w/
NBC for the story.
--Post has been working with WHA and PD on a possible S statement."
81;Saw that you called directly so we assume you will call in for second call ? he is ready
81;"Call Sheet.doc
Hrc - did jake or anyone discuss calling Argentina, uruguay and Peru on both honduras and copenhagen issues? Calls
could take place tomorrow. I've attached call sheets for oscar to print for you. Please let us know if u want to schedule."
81;
81;"Set for 12:30
You are calling redswitch from your black ste phone
202-647-5926"
81;III get back to you
81;"Yes line dropped
Rest is coming now"
81;
81;Yes but hang up one more time. So they can reestablish the line.
81;Just pick up phone and hang it up. And leave it hung up.
81;Ok.
81;"B6
Because of time difference, reaching all the embassies is challenging but I can type up something quickly and send
somethig latter this afternoon so long as you know its all completely tentative.
lm doing a call in a few minutes with
and then have a call with phil Gordon to review EUR priorities cause we
will be in Europe in less than a month, and it turns out that merkel is less flexible with dates than we thought."
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH©state.gov>
Wednesday, December 23, 2009 5:55 PM
H
FW: Visa for India B6
Fyi in case reached you directly She called me about visa issue for her son We just took care of it"
81;
81;Ok calling now.
81;
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Thursday, December 24, 2009 8:56 AM
Fw: WHEELS UP on GOLDMAN
Assume you are getting these updates as well."
81;
81;"yes we can
i will take care of it
and we will take care of signature"
81;
81;
81;Pls see note from rich.
81;
81;"Cc: Oscar Flores
Importance: High
Attached is the joint statement on the US-Russian Commission that just went out. Bill Burns and Jake cleared it but
wanted it sent to you as an fyi as well.
Oscar can u print as well"
81;We are reaching out.
81;
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Thursday, December 24, 2009 2:52 PM
RE:
B6
Excellent. Yesterday was a madhouse but got a lot accomplished."
81;No just a night. Coming back tomorro
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, November 28, 2009 5:14 PM
H
Fw: Quint fms
I'm going to
propose separate bilats with relevant countries. You ok with proceeding that way?"
81;"Yes, vali is working on an answer sheet for some of the tough q and a like blackwater, drones, quetta shura and nuclear
security. You will have tonite or tomorrow am."
81;
81;
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, December 26, 2009 2:28 PM
Re: (Reuters) Taliban Planned to Use Americans In Pakistan Attacks"
81;"We did
Huma Abedin
Tuesday, December 29, 2009 10:58 AM
H; 'ValmoroLJ@state.gov'
Re: American Friends of the Hebrew University Scopus Award Dinner - March 11, 2010"
81;Revised draft of prayer breakfast remarks coming in 15 min by fax.
81;
81;"Robinson can talk at 4pm today
Do u want to confirm?
III get you revised paper"
81;"First we are hearing of uruguay, just checked the year end requests from travel and its not in there. We will find out.
As for communities of democracies, building and bureau very much aware you committed to going. We just need to
work with them through dates etc."
81;Inauguration for president mujica of uruguay is March 1st.
81;"10:30 Lithuanian FM Azubalis (you will have call sheet soon)
10:45 Secretary Gates
11am Tony Blair
11:30 Conference Call on doha speech (also sending paper for you to see before that call)"
81;"Yes on lithuania video
We will try on moving dates but we have been aware they are set for the 9-11th Will start working on it."
81;
81;"Importance: High
In case cdm didn't share already"
81;
81;
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, February 13, 2010 9:28 PM
Huma Abedin; H
Re: hi huma/
About to land in shannon. Will call soon."
81;"Cole
Lee
Chandler
Stearns
Hastings
Whitfield
Ryan
Edwards"
81;
81;Actually binder almost ready so speech is coming in binder
81;
81;
81;"We have it
Already working on schedule"
81;
81;Yes we can do that this afternoon.
81;
81;Fyi
81;Ok
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH©state.gov>
Sunday, February 21, 2010 10:51 AM
H
Asked me to call back with details. Any direction?"
81;
81;
81;Will aim for robinson and Mccue for 745 one after the other. Ok?
81;He just called in again asking if you could talk
81;
81;
81;http://www.suntimes.com/2072121,desiree-rogers-quits-022610.article
81;"Soaring cost of healthcare sets a record By Noam N. Levey February 4, 2010 Los Angeles Times
Spending was 17.3% of the economy last year. The share paid by the U.S. will soon exceed 50%, a study says.
In a stark reminder of growing costs, the government has released a new estimate that healthcare spending grew to a
record 17.3% of the U.S. economy last year, marking the largest one-year jump in its share of the economy since the
government started keeping such records half a century ago.
The almost $2.5 trillion spent in 2009 was $134 billion more than the previous year, when healthcare consumed 16.2%
of the gross domestic product, according to an annual report by independent actuaries at the federal Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services, or CMS, scheduled for release Thursday.
The nonpartisan accounting agency also projected that as early as next year, the country could mark another milestone
as government picks up more than half of the nation's total healthcare tab for the first time.
The rise in current costs, driven in part by surging spending in Medicare and Medicaid, and the bleak projections for the
future do not take into account changes that may come if Democrats revive their healthcare overhaul legislation.
The report appears likely to fuel further debate about the health bills now stalled in Congress.
In the absence of change, the report raises a grim prospect for the country -- a healthcare system consuming an ever
greater and potentially unsustainable share of the economy even as private health coverage lags.
Last year, CMS estimated that government spending on healthcare would not overtake private spending until 2016,
compared with 2011 or 2012 in the current report.
""The health system is hurting, and we are seeing that in these numbers,"" said Karen Davis, president of the
Commonwealth Fund, a leading authority on healthcare policy.
The report also points up the financial cost of the so-called Great Recession and the growing pressure it is putting on
state and local governments.
Federal and state spending on Medicaid, the nation's primary health insurance program for low-income Americans,
jumped nearly 10% in 2009, according to the report. Medicare spending, meanwhile, shot up just over 8%.
Obama and many healthcare experts have argued that reshaping the healthcare system will ultimately make it more
efficient, even if overall health spending continues to increase -- a claim Republicans dispute.
Fueled by new technology, an aging population, rising incomes and other changes, spending on medical care has been
consuming a larger and larger share of the nation's economy for years, jumping from about 5% of the gross domestic
product in 1960 to nearly 14% in 2000.
But the recession that began in 2007 accelerated that trend, as the economy contracted while healthcare spending
continued to increase, according to CMS.
Even now, with the economy slowly recovering, the government expects that the growth of healthcare spending will
outpace the expansion of the economy. By 2020, 1 of every 5 dollars spent in the U.S. is expected to go to healthcare.
Some economists believe that this is not necessarily a problem, as the healthcare industry can provide good jobs and
improve both health and productivity.
But there is growing concern that as much as a third of the medical care delivered in this country does not help patients.
""Are we getting value for the dollar? That is the question,"" said Len Nichols, health policy director at the centrist New
America Foundation. ""If you believe that so much medical care is unnecessary, as I do, then it is criminal that we are
spending so much.""
Stuart Butler, vice president for domestic and economic policy at the conservative Heritage Foundation, said that the
numbers underscore the need for more aggressive action to curb spending.
""The only way to do this is to simply spend less,"" Butler said, warning that the health bills being pushed on Capitol Hill do
the opposite.
CMS officials noted that healthcare spending has been increasing even as the number of Americans without health
insurance is growing, another sign of problems with the system.
""With higher unemployment, people lose their jobs [and] many of them lose their healthcare coverage in the process.
And under current law, they don't have much to fall back on,"" said Richard S. Foster, chief actuary.
Foster said that the report by his office indicated that two of the main trends driving calls for a health overhaul -- rising
costs and shrinking numbers of people with health coverage -- are essentially the same as they were when the
healthcare debate began last year.
""Nothing much has changed in that regard,"" he said.
Inefficiency is becoming a particularly acute problem for state and federal governments, which the report shows are
increasingly supporting the nation's healthcare system.
Half a century ago, government accounted for just a quarter of all healthcare spending. Now, as the cost of caring for
elderly and poor Americans swells, government's share of the total bill is fast becoming greater than that of the private
sector.
The trend accelerated in the recession, as Washington spent billions of dollars to help states prop up Medicaid programs
being strained by the growing ranks of the unemployed and uninsured.
The healthcare legislation being debated on Capitol Hill could increase the government commitment to healthcare as
the federal government boosts the Medicaid program and provides billions of dollars of subsidies to low- and moderate-
income Americans to help them buy insurance.
But in a separate report a month ago, CMS actuaries estimated that the Senate healthcare bill would boost total
healthcare spending by less than 1% over the next decade, in large part because the legislation includes initiatives to
make Medicare more efficient."
81;you?
81;"you?
Actually he called back and took the earlier time of 9:30. So strobe, lobo, patino, mubarak. Then u can decide on johnnie
and alec ross."
81;"you?
Coming over secure fax at 9am."
81;
81;"The Secretary's Phone Call with Egyptian President Mubarak
Background: S/E Mitchell met with Foreign Minister Aboul Gheit and EGIS Chief Omar Solimon on January 24 in Cairo.
While Solimon responded positively to S/E Mitchell's request that Egypt encourage Palestinian President Abbas to agree
to proximity talks, Aboul Gheit asserted that the Palestinians should not agree to any form of negotiations until Israel
has taken action on the ""five steps"" requested by the Palestinians. Aboul Gheit then hosted a meeting on February 3
with Palestinian negotiator Saeb Erekat and Jordanian FM Nasser Judeh, which Solimon attended in part. Egypt and
Jordan agreed to support the Palestinians entry into proximity talks, but the three sides also agreed that Abbas would
seek U.S. views on two questions: 1) The terms of reference for the proximity talks and 2) Whether the U.S. would
present its own bridging proposals on final status issues or simply serve as a conduit for the parties' positions. Deputy
Envoy David Hale met with Abbas on February 5, during which Abbas indicated flexibility on both the terms of reference
(he would accept a general formula based on language from the Roadmap) and on the U.S. role. You should emphasize
that it is critical that Abbas agree to begin proximity talks immediately to lay the foundation for negotiations that will
realize Palestinian aspirations for an independent and viable state."
81;"Ok great! We'll do ecuador now cause otherwise we lose him.
So pinato, mubarak, lobo."
81;"So qatar and saudi?
Yes or no to bahrain?"
81;"You are congratulating him on becoming foreign minister, and purpose is to establish a personal relationship with him.
Trying to get u call sheet, its classified....
Lobo call not happening today."
81;"Sorry I mean pinato
He's not available
Heard u got lobo."
81;We'd have to come up with something. Which we can.
81;Aboul gheit just called to follow up on mubarak call. Do you want to take it?
81;Call sheets should have been in your call sheet folder. Not sure what happened.
81;Yes
81;
81;
81;
81;From our dawn friend.
81;Assume cdm already shared with u.
81;
81;Will print too.
81;
81;"Ur email must be back up!!
What happened is Judith sent you an email. It bounced back. She called the email help desk at state (I guess assuming u
had state email) and told them that. They had no idea it was YOU, just some random address so they emailed. Sorry
about that. But regardless, means ur email must be back! R u getting other messages?"
81;Nothing.
81;
81;I did email her yesterday to see availability. Will confirm her
81;
81;"Yes I emailed u back earlier, hope u are not having more trouble.
Have told mario we are switching. Secret service knows. Lona confirming."
81;
81;We just heard there's no 2. Its 230 or 3. What would you like?
81;"This is old.
She emailed back this am and said she wasn't free."
81;"Death toll jumps to 708 after Chile quake: president
SANTIAGO, February 28, 2010 (AFP) - The official death toll for Chile's devastating 8.8-magnitude earthquake and
resulting tsunami jumped Sunday to 708 confirmed fatalities, President Michelle Bachelet told reporters here."
81;
81;"Zach talked to me about it last night as well. Will be between april 21st and may 2nd. He will let us know as soon he gets
the date.
Cdm did tell us to hold the 9th at whitehaven so we are doing that."
81;He was very flexible but this week would be great. We can try and do tomorrow.
81;I talked to johnnie and relayed all info below to you. But so that u also have.
81;"Statement by the President on the Earthquake in Haiti
""My thoughts and prayers go out to those who have been affected by this earthquake. We are closely monitoring the
situation and we stand ready to assist the people of Haiti.""
Background information: The President was informed of the earthquake at 5:52pm. The President asked his staff to
make sure that embassy personnel are safe, and to begin preparations in the event that humanitarian assistance is
needed. The Department of State, USAID and the United States Southern Command have begun working to coordinate
an assessment and any such assistance.
###"
81;
81;
81;
81;B6
81;
81;
81;Fyi - from your ambassador in papua new guinea.
81;
81;
81;"RELEASE IN PART
B6"
81;
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Thursday, January 14, 2010 6:37 AM
Public number
You can give out a number for the public to call for questions or information on Haiti.
1-888-407-4747
For foreign leaders, the Ops number of is best."
81;
81;"Possibility of Senate Run, Nurtured and Abandoned By MICHAEL BARBARO March 03, 2010 New York Times
A few weeks ago, Harold E. Ford Jr. had a telephone conversation with his friend Doug Band, the powerful counselor to
former President Bill Clinton.
Mr. Ford, the former Tennessee congressman who now works on Wall Street, wanted to discuss a potential challenge to
Senator Kirsten E. Gillibrand in New York's Democratic primary, a possibility he had flirted with for weeks.
But Mr. Band was not encouraging. He told Mr. Ford that with Democrats reeling from political setbacks across the
country, it would be bad for the party and his career if he entered the race. ""It's not the right thing to do,"" he said,
according to a person with direct knowledge of the conversation.
A Ford spokesman confirmed the call but denied that Mr. Ford had been discouraged from running or that he had been
told that doing so would hurt the party. The spokesman said Mr. Band told him the White House had pressured Mr.
Clinton into supporting Ms. Gillibrand.
Mr. Ford's decision not to run for the Senate, which he disclosed on Tuesday, came after he reached out to dozens of
donors, advocates and political leaders. In private conversations, the same worries emerged: that a race against Ms.
Gillibrand would be a brutal fight, dominated by endless debates about when he began paying taxes as a New York
resident and the sincerity of his support for gay marriage and abortion rights.
A campaign that he had hoped would focus on tax cuts and job growth would instead, he feared, become mired in
discussions of ""who got there first, and who meant it the most,"" on social issues, he told an associate. That might allow a
Republican opponent to swoop in and take the seat from the bloodied Democratic nominee.
What seemed to weigh on him, interviews with dozens of people who have met and spoken to his advisers revealed,
was not his status as a carpetbagger who had moved to New York from Tennessee, but rather the reality that there were
few easy constituencies for him to grab on to, outside of Wall Street, where he has worked since moving here in 2006.
Many spoke on the condition of anonymity because they did not want to be seen as disclosing private conversations.
As he hopscotched from city to city, charming crowds with bits of his Southern biography, signs of trouble for Mr. Ford
emerged. His voting record in Congress put him on the right fringes of state Democrats, and his $2 million-a-year job at
Merrill Lynch made it hard to run as a Scott Brown-style populist.
What seemed like an improbable, even impossible campaign had its roots in conversations, many dating back a year,
among Mr. Ford, 39, and a coterie of powerful friends from New York City, Washington and Los Angeles.
Over dinner last July at the Post House, a clubby steakhouse on the Upper East Side, Richard Plepler, a co-president of
HBO, urged Mr. Ford to restart his political career in New York. ""I think you should give this serious thought,"" he said, of
the Senate race. Mr. Ford replied that he would.
After the dinner, Mr. Plepler sent an e-mail message to Douglas E. Schoen, a top Democratic pollster, to bounce the idea
off him. Mr. Schoen was intrigued, and as he studied public polls, became convinced that Mr. Ford's best shot at
reaching the Senate was to wage a campaign against Ms. Gillibrand.
Over the next few months, Mr. Ford sounded out many of New York's wealthiest and most politically connected
executives, frequently over breakfast at the Regency Hotel on Park Avenue: Robert Wolf, the head of the United States
investment banking division at UBS; Ronald Perelman, the billionaire chairman of Revlon; and Steven Rattner, the
founder of Quadrangle, the private equity firm, all of whom are big Democratic donors.
Mr. Rattner told Mr. Ford, who is also a political analyst on NBC, that money would not be a problem. ""You can raise the
money,"" he told him in December.
Yet several big-name donors warned him that Ms. Gillibrand, a relentless campaigner, had beaten him to the punch.
""She has already locked a lot of Wall Street up"" was the message that Marc Lasry, a billionaire hedge fund manager,
conveyed to Mr. Ford in a telephone conversation.
As Mr. Ford traveled outside New York City, especially upstate, he found political support for Ms. Gillibrand to be
shallow, and the hunger for change palpable. The mayor of Syracuse, Stephanie Miner, told him that residents there
were ""scared and desperate"" about the economy, and she told Mr. Ford that Ms. Gillibrand was a rare presence in her
city.
But Ms. Gillibrand's strategy of portraying Mr. Ford as a showboating out-of-towner was starting to stick. In late January,
the head of the Brooklyn Democratic Party, Assemblyman Vito J. Lopez, held a luncheon for Mr. Ford, and invited local
lawmakers. During a two-hour question-and-answer session, Marty Markowitz, the borough president, pointed to
several up-and-coming state senators around the room and observed that all of them had greater experience in New
York politics than Mr. Ford.
""With all due respect,"" he asked Mr. Ford, ""why do you think you have what it takes to be New York's senator?""
Even lawmakers who seemed open to a Ford candidacy warned him that peeling away support from Ms. Gillibrand
would be harder than it seemed.
Ruben Diaz Jr., the Bronx borough president, told Mr. Ford between bites of an omelet at a diner near his office, ""It's
difficult to make a strong case against her here."" Ms. Gillibrand, he explained, had just secured $4 million worth of
federal stimulus money to train his constituents for green jobs. Mr. Ford knew that some liberals would attack his
relatively conservative voting record but, those he spoke with said, he was taken aback by the depth of the anger he
encountered from advocates for abortion rights and gay marriage.
After reporters found examples of Mr. Ford calling himself pro-life during his time in Congress, Mr. Ford vehemently
pushed back, saying he had always supported a woman's right to choose. He assumed that would put the matter to rest.
It did not. ""He was dumbfounded that it kept tripping him up,"" a friend said.
One of Mr. Ford's top advisers, Bradley Tusk, the campaign manager for Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg's 2009 re-election,
arranged a meeting for Mr. Ford with a close Bloomberg ally, Kelli Conlin, the head of Naral-Pro Choice of New York. Mr.
Ford expected a polite conversation that would help neutralize a foe. Ms. Conlin, however, started the meeting by
quizzing Mr. Ford on his voting record and public statements.
Did he realize, she asked, that he had backed legislation that would outlaw late-term abortions even when a woman's
health is in danger?
Far from conciliatory, Mr. Ford wanted to know why Naral allowed Ms. Gillibrand to vote for a health care bill that cut
off financing for abortions. ""You gave her a pass,"" he said. Before leaving, Mr. Ford told Ms. Conlin that if he chose to
run he hoped to return to ask for the group's support. Ms. Conlin responded: ""We can never support you if you take
these positions."" Mr. Ford ""looked shocked,"" a person in the room said.
His meeting with gay rights advocates on Feb. 24 was rockier still. When he walked into the headquarters of the
Stonewall Democrats in the Chelsea neighborhood of Manhattan, he was greeted by signs that read ""Liar!"" and ""Go
home snake oil Harry,"" a reference to his recent support for gay marriage after having twice voted to outlaw it in
Congress.
A few days later, the results of a poll that Mr. Ford had paid for out of his own pocket began to trickle in, giving his
advisers pause. His negative ratings had increased slightly. A liberal primary electorate seemed wary about portions of
his record. Ms. Gillibrand remained vulnerable, the data showed, but Mr. Ford's chance seemed to be 50-50. ""It was not
a slam dunk, at all,"" said a person who spoke with him and was briefed on the data.
Mr. Tusk had told associates that to win, Mr. Ford needed 80 percent of the state's black vote, a tall order, but not
inconceivable for an African-American in a Democratic primary. But by the end of the week, Gov. David A. Paterson and
Representative Charles B. Rangel had become embroiled in ethics scandals. New York's black political elite was in
seeming disarray, just when he needed them to be organized and unified.
By Sunday, he had made up his mind not to run. He told his wife, Emily, and his father, former Representative Harold
Ford Sr. He began to call friends the next evening, leaving many of them brief messages.
""I'm not going to run this time,"" he said in one message. ""Thank you for your support."""
81;
81;
81;"STATEMENT OF SECRETARY CLINTON
The Passing of Victoria DeLong
This morning I spoke with the family of Victoria DeLong, the Cultural Affairs Officer at our Embassy in Port-Au-Prince
who lost her life in the earthquake. I expressed my sincerest condolences on behalf of the men and women of the State
Department and the American people. This is one tragedy among so many. The United Nations has suffered grevious
losses. And the Hatian people have endured unimaginable heartbreak. For the State Department, we have lost one of
our own. Victoria was a veteran Foreign Service Officer who worked tirelessly to build bridges of understanding and
respect between the people of the United State and the people of Haiti. She served her country with distinction and
honor, and she will be sorely missed. Victoria's friends and colleagues at the Embassy are working day and night to
support vital relief and recovery efforts, and our thoughts, our prayers, and our deepest thanks are with them as well.
Along with the military personnel, the search and rescue teams, and all the aid and relief workers now deploying, they
represent the unwavering commitment of the United States to stand with Haiti in its hour of need and in the hard days
and years to come. My heart is with the DeLong family today, and with all those in Haiti and around the world who have
lost loved ones and friends in this disaster.
###"
81;
81;
81;"POLITICO Breaking News:
Rep. Vic Snyder (D-Ark.) announced tonight that he will be retiring at the end of his term, citing the difficult political
environment that he would have faced to win an eighth term in the House."
81;"We told roberta 1pm works
Will offer ashton 12 for ashton so you are not rushed Lona says Cathedral isn't until 6pm if u decide to go. She has done
nothing about it."
81;"We are also bringing the following ngo representatives on the plane with us.
They have infrastructure on the ground so we are just giving them a ride there. Ngos are concern worldwide, catholic
relief services, food for the hungry and world vision."
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;B6
81;"Final[1] jjs.docx; Draft_S-McGuinness_Call_Sheet-FINAL[1] jjs.docx
You had signed off on making these Ireland calls with jake for tomorrow morning as well so we are reaching out."
81;"Colleagues, The Operations Center would like to call your attention to the following report received from Embassy
Dakar. DCM Jay Smith, Embassy Dakar reports a possible forced change of leadership in Guinea-Bissau. Reports indicate
that:
• Prime Minister Gomes and Chief of Defense Zamora lnduta have been arrested; • Early indications are the
deputy chief of defense may be responsible for the arrests; • The former Navy Chief of Staff has been ""liberated""
from the UN compound where he had been a refugee; • The president reportedly remains in office and it is unclear
if he is aligned with those arrested or those seeking to take power; • There are no official Americans in country and
approximately 12 private resident Americn citizens; Post is checking on their safety."
81;"I'm going to call today to get more info and only way to make this work is to do on front end of talinn so u get back for
engagement party. But do u have any immediate reaction to the suggestion?"
81;"Purpose of Call: Foreign Minister Nkoana-Mashabane has asked to speak with you about the upcoming vote at the
World Bank on the Medupi Power Plant in South Africa."
81;
81;"He is willing to take your call anytime between 9am and 4pm. What time would u like to do? Points below
The Secretary's Call Sheet for
Algerian Prime Minister Ahmed Ouyahia (AH-med ooh-YA-hee-ah)"
81;"German FM Westerwelle 930am
Sir Reg Empey 1030 am
Peter Robinson 1230pm
Martin McGuinness after 1230. His staff says he wants to talk today.
Catherine Ashton potentially today.
Condi Rice pushed to next week"
81;"Ok we may miss ashton which wouldn't be end of world. Her staff has been emailing saying she's anxious to talk but they
haven't locked a time. I did tell her staff we weren't going to push russians to cancel quartet dinner."
81;No windows at all yet from her team.
81;
81;
81;
81;"Just came in from ops. Will send more info as we get it.
The FAA Operations Center reports a Qatari passenger aboard United Airlines flight 663 attempted to light his shoes on
fire and was detained by Federal Air Marshals. The flight was en route to Denver from Reagan National. FAA believes
the man may have some diplomatic status."
81;
81;
81;"U ok with statement?
Statement by the Secretary
The Death of Polish President Kaczynski and His Delegation
I join President Obama in offering my deepest condolences to the people of Poland, to the Kaczynski family, and to the
families of all those killed in this tragedy. Lost alongside President Kaczynski and his wife were Polish leaders from
across the political spectrum, men and women who shaped and sped Poland's post-1989 democratic transformation and
were leading Poland into its promising future. The tragedy of these lives cut short will be felt deeply across the world,
but their legacy will live on in a free and flourishing Poland.
The United States stands with the Polish people in this difficult hour. Like the country he led, President Kaczynski was
one of America's most valued and trusted allies. He was well known in the United States as a champion for democracy
against an oppressive regime, a man whose journey took him from the Gdatisk Shipyards to the presidency of a free
people. President Kaczynski was an unstinting advocate for freedom and human rights not just in Poland, but around
the world. He will be long remembered and sorely missed.
The Polish people have endured more than their share of sorrow, but they have always shown resilience and resolve in
the face of adversity -- and I know they will pull- together in solidarity to grieve this loss.
My thoughts and prayers are with all the people of Poland today."
81;Thx
81;Fyi
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, March 20, 2010 11:26 AM
Oscar Flores
Abu Mazen
I understand you are ok making the abu mazen call. Everyone agrees you should make it and they want you to do it
today. Can you do after marianne?
Below are points."
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH©state.gov>
Monday, April 12, 2010 9:20 AM
Fw: (AP) Northern Ireland picks justice minister in peace landmark"
81;"Oh I apologize. Jake said he spoke with you about it and that you'd agreed to do it if mitchell recommended it. He does
recommend it, these are points from him about what to say. And they asked if you would do today.
III follow up."
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, March 20, 2010 11:35 AM
Re: Abu Mazen
They are in the original email I sent and pasting again below. Oscar should have printed.
B5"
81;Yup. Already did that.
81;
81;
81;He's asking us to schedule it. He's on his way home now and said he can do in the next few hours.
81;"Ill ask about 7
And make sure he can connect to a white phone."
81;"7 with jim is fine
Call from your white phone when u r ready and they will connect you."
81;
81;"He cannot do 7.
Asking if you can do 8pm?"
81;
81;
81;
81;"Joint Statement by Former President Clinton and Secretary of State Clinton on the Passing of Dr. Dorothy Height We are
deeply saddened to learn of the passing of Dr. Dorothy Height, an icon of America's long march toward equality and a
personal inspiration to us both. As the only woman among the ""Big Six"" civil rights leaders, Dr. Height helped galvanize a
movement that changed our country forever. She organized the ""Wednesdays in Mississippi"" meetings that brought
black and white women together to find common ground and break down barriers. She never stopped fighting for what
she knew was right. And through it all, she was always the best dressed woman in the room. We were blessed to know
Dr. Height, to benefit from her grace, passion and wisdom, and to call her our friend. For decades, starting with the early
days at the Children's Defense Fund, we worked with her, learned from her, and drew inspiration from her example.
From the Presidential Medal of Freedom, to the Congressional Gold Medal, to the unveiling of a long-sought-after bust
of Sojourner Truth in the United States Capitol, we had the privilege of helping honor Dr. Height and her
accomplishments. Born before women had the right to vote, denied access to the college of her choice because of the
color of her skin, and witness to nation divided, Dr. Height dedicated her life to the proposition that all Americans should
have the opportunity to live up to their full God-given potential. Our nation is poorer for her loss but infinitely richer for
the life she led, the progress she achieved, and the people she touched. Our thoughts and prayers are with Dr. Height's
family today, and with her many loving friends and colleagues. She would be the first to tell us that the best way to
honor her memory is to carry forward the work she started and the causes she championed, to open wide the freedom
gates. May we all find the strength and the wisdom to live up to her legacy."
81;
81;"Basically if they can get their teams in from brussels tomorrow morning (a day before nato starts), its moving forward.
We should know approx 6am our time. However, if we need to be wheels up at 8am, that's too short notice. I just told
ivo we need to lean on them to make a decision sooner. Will keep u posted but we are def getting the sense they want
to move forward."
81;
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sunday, April 18, 2010 6:21 PM
Re: Tomorrow
latest is that nato will make decision tomorrow morning, they don't want to cancel unless they have to and unless we
have other dates to offer. We talked about around poland in July for the alternative.
Phil and I are connecting early tomorrow.
My guess is it will be moved."
81;
81;"Yes sorry.
Here is what he said:"
81;This is the latest, believe it or not.
81;"Update on airport openings. Looks like estonia is partially open. They think most ministers will fly private so they seem to
want to try and move forward."
81;
81;
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, May 1, 2010 12:05 PM
Update from ops
Subject: (SBU) Amcit detained for explosives threat on flight from Taipei to Shanghai • During China Airlines flight
501, Amcit told cabin crew his luggage contained explosives.
The plane was diverted to Hangzhou, wherenvas detained by Chinese authorities. Authorities found no
explosives on the flight, and the plane continued to Shanghai. • According to the Taiwan National Immigration
Agencyjattempted to board with U.S. passport number However, because he did not have a valid
Chinese visa,flflew on his Taiwanese passport."
81;
81;"This call will be after indonesia. Oscar can u print for her?
Points for President Silajdzic call:"
81;"Formal eur points on bosnia:
Proposed Points Follow:
Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Saturday, April 24, 2010 1:16 PM
H; Oscar Flores
Bosnia"
81;We can def ask.
81;
81;Sandy levin returned your call
81;
81;
81;"Not yet.
She said she would send it but haven't got info yet.
III check in"
81;"you are going to be in estoniaand as you know we talked about israel for this trip as well potentially (although maybe we
are never going there....).
ii told zach becfore they scheduled to do it earlier in the week if they really wanted you to be able to come.
he said they couldnt and you and i discussed getting the dvd for you.
i did tell cvc as well that moving party from the april 10th date to the 24th would make it difficult for you to go. unless
you want us to make the schedule work somehow."
81;Fyi before u talk to dai.
81;
81;"From ops:
CG Shanghai provided the update below on Chinese President Hu's visit to the U.S. pavilion at the Shanghai Expo. For
your situational awareness:
SWO Chinese President Hu Jintao visited the USA Pavilion at the Shanghai Expo around 12:30 p.m. for 15-20 minutes
Thursday, April 29 (Shanghai time). USA Pavilion Commissioner General Jose Villarreal and Consul General Beatrice
Camp greeted President Hu, who was accompanied by Vice Premier Wang Qishan, Shanghai Expo Bureau officials, and a
large contingent of Chinese media. Hu then walked through the pavilion's initial section (the ""Overture"") where Vice
Premier Wang Qishan called attention to all the logos of the pavilion's sponsors. The Chinese president also viewed a
film clip of President Obama welcoming visitors to the pavilion and shook hands with about 10 of the nearly 80 U.S.
""student ambassadors"" staffing the pavilion. Before departing, President Hu thanked Commissioner General Villarreal
and wished the USA Pavilion great success."
81;"BEIJING, April 29 (Reuters) - A knife-wielding man injured 28 children, two teachers and a security guard in a
kindergarten in eastern China, state media reported on Thursday, the fourth such stabbing case in recent weeks. Xu
Yuyuan, 47, an unemployed local man, broke into a classroom in Taixing city of eastern Jiangsu province on Thursday
morning, attacking the children with a 20 cm long knife, the official Xinhua news agency said. The injured children were
all about four years old, and five are in critical condition, it added. Xu has been jobless since he was fired from a local
insurance company in 2001, and then took part in pyramid selling schemes, Xinhua added. The attack is the fourth
reported school stabbing in China in recent weeks, and the rash of violence has prompted public calls for more measures
to protect students in a country where many couples only have one child. A man stabbed 16 students and a teacher at a
primary school in southern China on Wednesday, the same day that a former doctor was executed for stabbing to death
eight school children last month. ""More concrete measures should be taken to make school the safest place,"" a
commentary in today's Beijing News said, calling for more serve punishment for these killers. Some Chinese people have
taken to the Internet to discuss the root causes of the increasing number of school tragedies"
81;"B1
1.4(B)
1.4(D)
Please print the message below from Embassy Beijing which gives some further background
===
(From Embassy Beijing)
I was the notetaker AMB Huntsman asked me.
to give you a readout
AmEmbassy Beijing
04/28/2035"
81;We traded calls but I haven't heard back.
81;
81;Yes we figured that?
81;"News to me
They want you to call the new ukrainian foreign minister but that's all I know."
81;Well most of the weekend planes are the little planes. Calling mario now to see..
81;"checked in with carlos and he says it would be useful, but not critical for you to call espinosa will have points for you
tomorrow in case you want to do"
81;Will ask.
81;"Did cheryl pass this message from carlos pascual to you? Wanted to make sure u saw
Madam Secretary -
One of our Mexican staff and the husbands of two Mexican employees were killed last night in Juarez.
In one case a Mexican employee and her husband were leaving a party hosted by another Mexican employee. They were
in separate vehicles. He was stopped by a hit squad and killed before her.
In a second case a Mexican employee and her husband were killed leaving the same party. Their 3 month-old baby was
left alive in the back seat.
We have activated all investigative and intelligence channels to learn all we can. The head of Mexico's intelligence
service called to express President Calderon's condolences and to offer any support we need. Patricia Espinosa is aware.
She may call you. We will let you know if there are any leads on why this tragedy occurred.
Carlos Pascual"
81;Yes. Any specific window?
81;Ok calling you with carlos after u r done with rch.
81;
81;"730 Afghan FM Rasoul
745 Maldivian President Nasheed"
81;"Thx pj.
Adding philippe too cause a joint draft statement is in the works."
81;"Want to let you know about an ops alert we just got, will keep u updated:
Ahmed bin Zayed Al Nahyan, younger brother of UAE President Khalifa bin Zayed al Nahyan, is presumed dead following
a glider crash in a Moroccan lake on Friday. Sources close to embassy report UAE authorities will make the formal
announcement after the conclusion of a significant horse racing event in Dubai later on March 27."
81;From haim.
81;Article from cdm
81;"Bombings in Moscow
Our thoughts and prayers are with the victims of this morning's bombings in Moscow, their families, and all the people
of Russia. This brutal assault on innocent civilians is another reminder that terrorism is a threat to peace-loving people
everywhere and must be met with unwavering resolve. I will offer my personal condolences to Foreign Minister Lavrov
later today in Ottawa. Together with our G8 partners, we will discuss how to improve international counterterrorism
coordination and cooperation. I was in Moscow earlier this month, and I know the resilience and determination of the
Russian people. The United States stands with them today and everyday in solidarity against violent extremism in all its
forms."
81;"Should have been faxed
Checking now."
81;Book will be there in 10 minutes.
81;No problem.
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Wednesday, March 31, 2010 7:59 AM
H
Fw: Did u hear anything from F
-1
Fyi"
81;
81;
81;Fyi
81;
81;
81;In case u see hbj
81;"HOUSTON — (March 31, 2010) - Former First Lady Barbara Bush was discharged Wednesday from The Methodist Hospital
in Houston after undergoing a series of tests. Doctors believe Mrs. Bush, 84, may have had a mild relapse of her Graves
disease, a thyroid condition for which she was treated in 1989. As a result, her physicians at Methodist have adjusted
her medication. Upon discharge she was alert, talkative and appeared to be getting stronger as she prepared to return
home.
Mrs. Bush arrived Saturday at the hospital, where she received a number of tests including blood tests and imaging
studies. Just over a year ago Mrs. Bush received a replacement aortic valve at Methodist, which doctors said is working
very well.
Mrs. Bush is expected to make a full recovery and should soon return to her normal activities."
81;Fyi - Arturo making a renewed pitch for ecuador. We haven't discussed further yeti
81;He landed and is home He will also be in the office for the entire day tomorrow. 202 419 1420. B6
81;"Importance: High
Loretta will be at speech."
81;Not sure who will be there but here is possibility:
81;We have a lot of people in meeting but we talked and will bring them to end of meeting so she can specially meet them.
81;"After Afghan Shift, Top U.S. Civilians Face Tricky Future By MARK LANDLER WASHINGTON — As General David H.
Petraeus takes command in Afghanistan, the two top American civilian officials in the war face an uncertain and tricky
future, working with a newly empowered military leader, under the gaze of an impatient president who has put them on
notice that his fractious war council needs to pull together.Richard C. Holbrooke, the Obama administration's special
representative to the region, and Karl W. Eikenberry, the ambassador to Afghanistan, both hung on to their jobs in the
uproar that followed Gen. Stanley A. McChrystal's career-ending quotes in Rolling Stone magazine.But privately, at least
one senior White House official suggested using General McChrystal's exit as an excuse for a housecleaning, according to
senior officials. That was rejected as too disruptive during a military campaign that relies heavily on civilian support,
these people said.ln recent days, other administration officials have begun floating the idea that Ambassador Eikenberry
might be replaced by Ryan C. Crocker, the highly regarded former ambassador in Iraq who forged a close partnership
with General Petraeus during the successful Iraq troop increase. Such a prospect is viewed as remote, given Mr.
Crocker's prestigious new post at Texas A&M University. But the fact that his name is being invoked underlines the
challenges that confront Ambassador Eikenberry, as he adapts to a new partner — one who has strong ideas about how
soldiers and diplomats should work together in war. It also illustrates the remarkably powerful role that General
Petraeus will assume in the nine-year-old war, setting him up as almost a viceroy in Afghanistan and a key broker in
negotiations between President Hamid Karzai and Pakistan over an eventual political settlement.Before General
Petraeus's arrival, some critics said the White House had created a problem by recruiting several forceful, ambitious
personalities and giving them jobs with overlapping responsibilities. Administration officials acknowledge that, as one
said, ""there are obviously a number of substantial personalities on the team."" But the White House believes that the
current lineup can mesh, and that a difficult war demands this much talent. Still, the McChrystal blow-up has
reverberated through the State Department. Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton instructed Ambassador
Eikenberry and Mr. Holbrooke to take a hard look at the civilian team, two officials said. She is not wedded to the
current lineup if it continues to bog down in internecine battles, they said.""You can't have a major shift in a civ-mil
structure without having the civilian side take a step back and look at everything,"" said a senior State Department
official, using the jargon for a civilian-military campaign.General Petraeus, whose appointment was approved 99-0 by
the Senate on Wednesday, took pains at his confirmation hearing on Tuesday to back a unified civilian and military
effort. He noted then that he had telephoned Mr. Holbrooke and would rendezvous with Ambassador Eikenberry in
Brussels, so the two could land in Kabul together.""Holbrooke has been my wingman, to a great degree,"" General
Petraeus said in an interview. ""We have had, and do have, a very good relationship."" That role, he said, will now fall to
Ambassador Eikenberry.Ambassador Eikenberry was highly critical of the Pentagon's proposal last year to send 60,000
additional troops to Afghanistan, which led to a difficult relationship with General McChrystal. But in fact General
Petraeus was the true architect of the plan.The ambassador, a retired lieutenant general and former commander in
Afghanistan, graduated from West Point in 1973, a year ahead of General Petraeus, but they did not know each other at
the academy. The two share a scholarly bent: General Petraeus holds a Ph.D. from Princeton, while Ambassador
Eikenberry has master's degrees from Harvard and Stanford.While they were never assigned together, their careers
intersected twice. In Iraq, General Eikenberry led an assessment of Iraqi security forces while General Petraeus was
commanding the 101st Airborne Division in Mosul. When General Eikenberry was commander in Afghanistan, General
Petraeus led an assessment of Afghan National Security Forces.General Petraeus declined to discuss personnel issues,
while Ambassador Eikenberry and Mr. Holbrooke turned down requests for an interview. Mr. Crocker, now the dean of
the George Bush School of Government at Texas A&M, did not return a call for comment. For Mr. Holbrooke, the new
landscape is challenging in other ways. Officials said his job security was less in doubt than it was six months ago, when
his ouster was the subject of Washington chatter. Yet he has arguably become a less central player: Jacob J. Lew, a
deputy secretary of state, manages much of the civilian influx in Afghanistan that Mr. Holbrooke helped shape, while the
embassy in Kabul is carrying it out. Mr. Holbrooke's current portfolio has played to his weaknesses, his own allies admit.
He is best as a high-level negotiator, and not as comfortable with the nitty-gritty work of helping Afghanistan build an
economy.These days, Mr. Holbrooke has become a globe-trotting diplomat, trying to retain flagging European allies
while seeking to draw influential Muslim countries like Egypt into helping Afghanistan. At a recent conference of 35
countries in Madrid, Mr. Holbrooke drummed up more support from allies for the Afghan government's campaign to
reintegrate Taliban fighters into mainstream society.Mr. Karzai's longer-term effort to reconcile with Taliban leaders,
and his negotiations with Pakistan, could propel Mr. Holbrooke back into a central role. Were these talks to become
more serious, several officials said, Mr. Holbrooke's negotiating skills could be put to use, as a broker and guardian of
American interests. For now, though, as evidence of General Petraeus's influence, he will do most of the shuttling
between Kabul and Islamabad, the Pakistani capital.On his last visit to the region, Mr. Holbrooke met with Mr. Karzai
and with senior Pakistani officials, including the army chief of staff, Ashfaq Parvez Kayani. Mr. Holbrooke's past run-ins
with Mr. Karzai, several officials said, have not hindered his ability to deal with the Afghan leader, and Pakistani officials
said they trusted him. Husain Haqqani, Pakistan's ambassador to Washington, said that Mr. Holbrooke took time to
understand Pakistan's concerns. ""Ambassador Holbrooke is liked by some, admired by others and seen as effective, even
by those who may not like him,"" Mr. Haqqani said.Still, General Petraeus is indisputably the key player, and he has
wasted no time asserting his control. On a secure videoconference call last Saturday, a person familiar with the call said,
General Petraeus threw his support behind a costly, and controversial, plan to install temporary generators to supply
more electricity to Kandahar, the Taliban stronghold that is the next major American military target.Mr. Holbrooke and
Ambassador Eikenberry swiftly assented."
81;
81;On your schedule
81;
81;"Huma Abedin
Friday, January 22, 2010 7:36 AM
H; 'ValmoroU@state.gov.
Re: Commencements
Yes we agree
Lona wanted to make sure you knew what was out there in case
are one or 2 we want: to discuss with u.
There"
81;No problem
81;Yes ops is reaching out to her soon.
81;
81;Yes it is eikenberry, my automatic spell check make it eugenie!
81;Fyi
81;"1.4(B)
Barak
1.4(D)
B1
Slightly edited Background for Barak call:
On Gaza and the ""controlled items"" list, Israeli MFA Director General Yossi Gal and Ministry of Defense COGAT General
Eitan Dangot briefed Monday in Israel on a release of the new list, and newly announced international projects. (The
Declassify on: 07/05/2035"
81;
81;
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Sunday, January 24, 2010 8:30 PM
H
cell. Funeral tomorrow. B6"
81;Ok
81;B6
81;"SECURITY COUNCIL PRESIDENTIAL STATEMENT ON THE RECENT INCIDENT IN THE EASTERN MEDITERRANEAN
The Security Council deeply regrets the loss of life and injuries resulting from the use of force during the Israeli military
operation in international waters against the convoy sailing to Gaza. The Council, in this context, condemns those acts
which resulted in the loss of at least ten civilians and many wounded, and expresses its condolences to their
families. The Security Council requests the immediate release of the ships as well as the civilians held by Israel. The
Council urges Israel to permit full consular access, to allow the countries concerned to retrieve their deceased and
wounded immediately, and to ensure the delivery of humanitarian assistance from the convoy to its destination. The
Security Council takes note of the statement of the UN Secretary—General on the need to have a full investigation into
the matter and it calls for a prompt, impartial, credible and transparent investigation conforming to international
standards. The Security Council stresses that the situation in Gaza is not sustainable. The Council re-emphasizes the
importance of the full implementation of Resolutions 1850 and 1860. In that context, it reiterates its grave concern at
the humanitarian situation in Gaza and stresses the need for sustained and regular flow of goods and people to Gaza as
well as unimpeded provision and distribution of humanitarian assistance throughout Gaza. The Security Council
underscores that the only viable solution to Israeli-Palestinian conflict is an agreement negotiated between the parties
and re-emphasizes that only a two-State solution, with an independent and viable Palestinian State living side by side in
peace and security with Israel and its other neighbours, could bring peace to the region. The Security Council expresses
support for the proximity talks and voices concern that this incident took place while the proximity talks are underway
and urges the parties to act with restraint, avoiding any unilateral and provocative actions, and all international partners
to promote an atmosphere of cooperation between the parties and throughout the region."
81;Yes
81;"7:30 Ukranian Foreign Minister Gryshchenko
8 Greek Prime Minister Papandreou"
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH©state.gov>
Friday, June 4, 2010 7:21 AM
H
Fyi"
81;I've already asked him. Waiting to hear back
81;little more time.
81;
81;"Background on the Women Deliver Conference CONTEXT The second Women Deliver conference will take place in
Washington, DC on June 7-9, 2010. This conference is an international gathering that focuses on maternal health and
will include an estimated 3,000 representatives from governments, civil society, multilateral organizations, and the
private sector. The aim of the conference is to generate political commitment and financial investment for fulfilling
Millennium Development Goal 5, which pledges a three-quarter reduction in maternal mortality and universal access to
reproductive health by 2015. The conference is one of several international gatherings this year that will include a focus
on maternal and child health (MCH). As you know, this issue will also feature at the G-8, where the Canadians are
offering a flagship initiative on MCH, and at the Millennium Development Goals Summit in September, where the UN
Secretary General is sponsoring a Joint Effort on Women and Children's Health. The US will be represented at the
Women Deliver conference by Secretary of Health and Human Services Kathleen Sebelius, Undersecretary of State Maria
Otero, Ambassador Melanne Verveer, and a host of other USG participants. Please note: You recently recorded a video
message that will open the conference.
The full script is below.
SUGGESTED TALKING POINTS
• For too long and in too many places, women have received inadequate care when they give birth. As a result,
childbirth remains a leading cause of death and injury to women worldwide. • The United States has elevated the
issue of maternal health in our development work through the Global Health Initiative, a $63 billion dollar proposal to
help countries improve health outcomes through strengthened health systems and integrated service delivery, with a
particular focus on the health of women, newborns and children. This conference—along with other international
gatherings this year, including the G-8 and the Millennium Development Goals Summit in September—presents a unique
opportunity to reinvigorate our commitment to maternal health. • When women prosper, their families and
communities prosper. Women deliver for the world – now the world needs to deliver for them. ADDITIONAL
BACKGROUND The theme of this year's Women Deliver conference is ""Delivering Solutions for Girls and Women,"" with a
focus on political, economic, social/cultural, and technological solutions. Conference organizers plan to emphasize the
following messages:1) The Millennium Development Goals will not be achieved without investing in
women.2) There is just enough time, if the world commits funding now, to achieve Millennium Development Goal 5—
an additional US $10 billion annually by 2010 and US $20 billion by 2015.Women Deliver was launched at a conference
in London in 2007. Jill Sheffield is the President of the organization.
FINAL VIDEO SCRIPT WOMEN DELIVER CONFERENCEWASHINGTON, DC
I am delighted to welcome all of you to this conference and to thank you for the work you are doing to put maternal
health at the top of our development agenda. Your commitment to this issue has raised awareness and inspired action
around the world. We know that women represent our greatest opportunity for progress in this century. If the potential
of women is fully developed, everyone benefits. And this can't be done without improving maternal health. But for too
long and in too many places, women have received inadequate care when they give birth. As a result, childbirth remains
a leading cause of death and injury to women worldwide. The United States has elevated this issue in our development
work through the Global Health Initiative, a 63 billion dollar proposal to help countries improve health outcomes
through strengthened health systems, with a particular focus on the health of women, newborns and children. We
commend the Canadian government for focusing much-needed attention to this issue by offering a flagship initiative on
maternal and child health at the upcoming G-8 meeting in Muskoka. The US also congratulates the United Nations
Secretary General for convening governments, civil society, multilateral organizations, foundations and corporations to
engage in a much-needed global effort to promote women's and children's health. These efforts—and this conference—
present a unique opportunity to reinvigorate our commitment to maternal health, because when women prosper, their
families and communities prosper. Women deliver for the world – now the world needs to deliver for them. Thank you."
81;
81;"Yes went to 2
With nephews for till halftime
And dougs party for second half"
81;"The Secretary's Call Sheet for
Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov
February 8, 2010"
81;
81;Ok.
81;"We also have equadorant foreign minister that never happened sat if u want to make that one as well. Either today or
tomorrow"
81;"You ok with this?
I was deeply saddened to hear of the passing of Congressman Jack Murtha. From the battlefields of Vietnam to the hills
of Western Pennsylvania to the halls of Congress, Jack Murtha lived by the Marine Corps credo ""Semper Fidelis,"" never
wavering in his faithful commitment to the country he loved and the men and women who bravely defend her. In war
and in peace, he fought for what he knew was right, even when it was unpopular. He was a fierce advocate for working
families struggling with a changing economy and for better health care and equipment for servicemembers. And over
the course of more than three decades in Congress, he became one of our nation's most respected voices on national
security and foreign policy. Presidents of both parties sought his advice and generations of colleagues looked to him for
leadership and wisdom. As Senator from New York serving on the Armed Services Committee, I was fortunate to call
Jack a friend and mentor. And as Secretary of State, I continued to rely on his expertise and judgment. I knew that Jack
would always shoot straight, like the Marine he was, and never shy away from a difficult question or a tough fight. Today
our country has lost a decorated war hero and a distinguished public servant. The men and women of the our armed
forces have lost a tireless champion. And the people of Pennsylvania's 12th district have lost a neighbor, an advocate,
and a true friend. My thoughts and prayers are with them and with Jack's beloved wife Joyce and their family. He will be
sorely missed."
81;
81;
81;"Mitchell/mara/jake agree best thing for mohlo to be told that you got full debrief on their meeting and given the
schedule challenges for tomorrow, would not be able to do mtg."
81;"Saw that you are on phone
Let me know if u need anything."
81;Ordering now.
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;"Jake Sullivan
Cheryl Mills
Mike Fuchs
Carmen LomeIlin
Craig Kelly
Jim Steinberg (tentative)
Arturo Valenzuela
Anne-Marie Slaughter
Ops will connect to you."
81;
81;See message below from your friend the egyptian foreign minister....
81;
81;
81;
81;Fyi
81;
81;
81;"We have scheduled calls tomorrow with:
- Swedish Foreign Minister Bildt at 9:00 am
- Norwegian Foreign Minister Stoere at 10:45 am You have call sheets for both.
Ok?"
81;We will connect calls to whitehaven. Unless u want to cancel?
81;Ok.
81;
81;"Will set up
I'm seeing next week and she's flexible so we can do any morning. B6
Think may be traveling but will check."
81;
81;
81;
81;"Westewelle cannot do call at 7:30.
Holbrooke says he needs to talk to you"
81;Ok.
81;ok sounds good.
81;
81;
81;
81;We had brief conversation about it with paul a while ago but we didn't know how early conf would start.
81;"Just sent oscar call sheets for nita lowey and greek fm papandraeou for you.
I think jake may have told you the aide to the Greek Minister of Citizens Protection was killed in the protests earlier this
week. EUR has made request that you place a condolence call to FM Papandreou this weekend. The week is going to be
tough politically and personally for the FM. The Minister of Citizens Protection has resigned as a result of the protests
and deaths. let me know if u want to.
Also, we have abdullah call for either tomorrow or monday. Waiting fo them to get back to us."
81;
81;"No date from slim.
We will follow up on all"
81;"In case you want to connect directly
Otherwise lauren can track for you"
81;
81;"Cristophe is coming tomorrow at 7:30, not Isabelle. Let me know who you want wednesday cause he's offered to come
then too."
81;When salon called, I told them to tell him about it so he might come.
81;I figured.
81;Yes easily.
81;Yes they should have known.
81;"hes back at home at nyc apartment
apparently doing well
lauren will have on call list
B6"
81;"Because of ash cloud flight issues, 1230 is earliest he can get there after landing.
I don't know about mccrystal."
81;
81;We have them.
81;"am today
No u r not. That's old and wrong."
81;
81;
81;That's right. You should leave here at 7:45 to be safe to catch the 11.
81;"am today
It shall be fixed."
81;
81;Yes lona has it on list
81;Had not heard but Iona taking care of it.
81;
81;
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH©state.gov>
Friday, May 14, 2010 8:22 AM
Fw: (AP) Diplomats: Iran expands enrichment facility"
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH©state.gov>
Sunday, May 16, 2010 11:15 AM
Oscar Flores
Fw: Latest Version of Draft S. Testimony for START Hearing
Clinton Testimony on the New START Treaty -- 5.16.10 DRAFT.docx
Oscar can u pis print for hrc to review?"
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Monday, July 19, 2010 2:08 AM
Fw: Letter from and Meeting with Afghan Minister of Labor, Social Affiars, Martyrs and
Disabled
MoLSAMD Letterjpg; MoLSAMD Letter page 2 docjpg"
81;"Disabled
From Karl"
81;in the south
81;
81;"41101■
11MIMMIII@IIMIIIIMONIN"
81;
81;
81;"I'm pretty sure I gave the original to lauren as soon a I received it. Doubt I made a copy but I may have cause he'd asked
for a tour. Let me check tomorrow."
81;Davutoglu called about Iran. Wants to speak sometime this morning. We are working to schedule.
81;"Fyi
Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Monday, May 17, 2010 9:58 PM
Fw: (AP) Extradition rumors close Jamaica businesses early"
81;Per your discussion with jake, we are doing lavrov call at 8:30am. He hasn't confirmed yet.
81;
81;"I'm not sure where you are but jim steinberg needs to talk to you secure asap.
Also, tony blair called back, he's free for next 3 hours.
And pm papandreou called, wants to give you readout from his middle east trip."
81;"Lincoln 145,207 (44.51%)
Halter 138,660 (42.51%)
• Morrison 42,349 (12.98%)
Because neither Lincoln nor Halter got 50%, runoff scheduled for June 8th."
81;
81;
81;
81;"Hmm, she just emailed.
Also, kurt and jeff went to press to talk to them briefly since it was already set up. Jake talked to them about it."
81;Yes I asked for the same
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;"Purpose:
Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.goy>
Wednesday, July 28, 2010 12:00 PM
H
sheet
RELEASE IN PART B5"
81;"Abedin, Hume <AbedinH@state.gov>
Thursday, May 27, 2010 9:56 PM
Fw: Update on Fr. Beirne,"
81;We'll find out.
81;"Calls confirmed:
Smith @ 8am
Lavrov @ 830am
Miliband @ 9am
Papandraeou originally confirmed"
81;
81;See below from arturo.
81;"POLITICO Breaking News:
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has canceled his visit to the White House in the aftermath of the Israeli
military's action against a flotilla seeking access to Gaza, the AP reports. White House spokesman Bill Burton said in
advance of Netanyahu's decision that the White House was currently ""to understand the circumstances surrounding this
tragedy."""
81;
81;"He called for you. Wants to discuss situation in israel and trip cancellation. Says he's flexible time wise.
Phil gordon and jeff feltman obviously following situation. We don't have a formal talking points yet."
81;"That is correct. We are set on 6.
Isabelle coming at 7:30 to whitehaven."
81;
81;
81;What do u think?
81;
81;
81;
81;"Mario and alonzo both say earlier the better. They think 2pm is ok but they wouldn't go any later than that.
Let's see if the shuttles this am are affected cause of weather. So we can reassess in an hour or 2."
81;"Call participants:
Counselor Cheryl Mills
Senator George Mitchell
Mr. Dennis Ross
Mr. Dan Shapiro
Assistant Secretary Jeff Feltman
Deputy Assistant Secretary Jake Wailes
Deputy Special Envoy David Hale
Ms. Huma Abedin"
81;We haven't heard yet that it will. But we are both monitoring.
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;"-- Ambassador Patterson met with Zardari last night and urged him to continue his public engagements on the flooding
crisis. She believes he is getting the message.
-- President Zardari visited flood sites in northwestern Pakistan. He will do so again tomorrow.
Zardari still plans to be out of Pakistan on August 18 in Sochi. We have assurances, though, that this will be a one-day
trip."
81;"This is what I got from s/rap:
-- Pakistan has asked the UNGA to convene a special plenary session on Pakistan on August 19 in New York. Zardari will
likely mention this and request the Secretary's participation."
81;
81;"This is memo eur put together for us-eu ministerial. We will end trip on 14th so if we did, will be on 14th or before. We
are re-mapping trip. Justin can also print.
NOTE FOR THE SECRETARY
FROM:EUR — Philip H. Gordon
SUBJECT: Proposal for a U.S.-EU Ministerial, October 15, Brussels"
81;"With the big plane and everyone on it?
Or we stop and switch planes?"
81;"19th afternoon has been confirmed
Taking a plane is a good idea so u have some flexibility."
81;
81;"no word from mashabane yet.
Or menendez (though menendez did try my cell while I was on plane) And alexander is available all day tomorrow till
1pm if u want to call."
81;I'm sure if she's around. Will ask.
81;"Well its clearly a state vs outside email issue. State has been trying to figure it out. So lj is getting all your emazils cause
she's on her personal account too."
81;"- did u get yu call sheet in pouch. Let me know if u want to schedule.
- alexander available until 1.
- menendez: can talk at 8pm today or tomorrow or thurs after 12pm
- mashabane is traveling in china so no word yet."
81;Ok sounds good
81;
81;
81;
81;"Waiting on yu.
Alexander will be pretty soon."
81;
81;Yes
81;"Justin printing for you
Talked to einhorn, he doesn't have mtg till 1pm. So if you called, needs to be after meeting. And there will be a new call
sheet."
81;
81;"7pm start time
Casual buffet dinner at their house in east hampton Book party for rosanne cash"
81;"She's driving and not checking email maybe.
Just called. She thinks 7:15pm is realistic."
81;
81;Word from palestinians
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;Importance: High
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;"For donilon, he can do from 9:45-12 on fri. What time do u want to do?
Also, they did phone and ringer test and it worked fine. But can only go secure thru ops 647 1512. With red switch, it
was dropping a few times."
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;You want me to come to chappaqua to help u leave today? Or meet u in nyc?
81;
81;Ok
81;"III let lauren handle
Ops can schedule menendez to lock in"
81;
81;
81;
81;Calling now
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;Jeff mentioned we are helping expedite visas for delegation.
81;
81;
81;What should I tell him?
81;
81;"Some more classified papers coming to house at 6pm:
- one re karzai
Update about an AmCit in Somalia
David Hale readout of a meeting
Barak/Abbas on Sunday"
81;
81;OF SENIOR TALIBAN COMMANDER TO KABUL FOR TALKS
81;
81;
81;
81;"He's headed to cisco phone
They will connect u at 1:45"
81;to stay away from public places
81;
81;
81;
81;Matthew doyle gave heads up that blair wants to talk about meeting with you separately before the sept 1 dinner.
81;"Netanyahu call points
Background
Quote from a readout of Netanyahu's meeting with senior advisers on Friday:
""Everyone knows that restrained and moderate construction in Judea and Samaria in the next year will no even affect
the peace process. Therefore the international community needs to call on the Palestinians to continue engaging in
peace talks. It is in the interest of the Palestinians just as it is in ours""... ""We did it [the moratorium] in order to give the
opportunity to enter direct negotiations without preconditions. Now I expect that the Palestinians show their flexibility
and continue with peace talks.""...""Unfortunately, as opposed to us, the Palestinians are just hardening their stance.""
Quote from Yasser Abed Rabbo that Bibi may raise:
""The leadership confirms that the resumption of talks requires tangible steps, the first of them a freeze on
settlements. The Palestinian leadership holds Israel responsible for obstructing the negotiations."""
81;
81;"Info on eric john that u asked for:
Ops is in contact with Eric, and has passed to him a message that the Secretary has
been informed and would be available to speak with him at an appropriate moment."
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Friday, August 27, 2010 10:25 AM
Re: Eric john"
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;"Ops alert re flotilla:
Mariam Gaza flotilla update #2 for 8/21: No departure on August 21 or 22
No Activity in Tripoli Port
(SBU) On Saturday, August 21, at 1620 hours Embassy investigators reported that both the
Mariam (formerly the Jounieh Star) and the Julia (aka the Naji al-Ali) remain in their same positions in the Lebanese port
of Tripoli without any signs of activity. The investigators added that there was no elevated security presence at the port
and no press was present. The team will return to Tripoli on Sunday, August 22, and we will provide further reports, as
appropriate.
GOL Says Ship Will Not Sail Before Monday
(SBU)
on either August 21 or 22, although
assured the RSO that the Mariam will not depart B6
declined to provide additional information.
Flotilla Organizer Claims Ship Will Not Sail Directly to Gaza
(U) Coordinator of the Mariam's efforts, Samar al-Hajj, told the LBC television channel on Saturday that contacts are
ongoing with countries near Gaza in order to acquire permission for the ship to dock at one of their ports. She
complained, ""It seems as if there is universal war against us....We will not allow anyone to cancel the ship's trip."" She
added that the ship will not head to Gaza directly from Tripoli, stressing, ""The ship cannot be the reason for the start of a
war."""
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;"Apparently Jeff said evening was horrible. Only AbZ and Kuwaiti showed up from GCC. All formal speeches, little ability
for chit chat. No great mood overall."
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;"Please Pass to the Secretary
Madame Secretary,
A shoot out occurred on August 20 in front of the American School in Monterrey (AFSM), resulting in the death of two
bodyguards. An investigation is continuing into the details, but our understanding at this point is that it was an
attempted kidnapping targeting the relatives of a local business executive. While it does not appear that U.S. families
were targeted, the sharp increase in kidnapping incidents in the Monterrey area, and this event in particular, present a
very high risk to the families of U.S. citizens who might be become incidental victims.
U.S. security and law enforcement personnel have engaged local and federal security officials to seek their help on
understanding the immediate risks and measures that can be taken. I have urged U.S. families at the Consulate in
Monterrey not to send their children to school in the coming days while we review the events that took place on August
20. We also are advising U.S. citizens in the area that we have urged Consulate personnel not to send their children to
school while we complete this security review.
I am sure that the warden notice will lead to a rash of press reports on U.S. concerns about security in Monterrey. More
broadly, if the government cannot get the kidnappings in Monterrey under control, that may affect our ability to
function in Monterrey. I have advised Secretary Espinosa of this, and have sought her help as well to address consulate
security.
Consulate personnel are currently on ""authorized departure"" and have the option to send their families to a U.S.
location. Pat Kennedy is in close touch on these matters.
Carlos Pascual"
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;Checked in with people and everyone seems to be doing their own thing,
81;
81;
81;
81;been released
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;Hrc, pis see note that jimmy carter sent to lauren re tues. Do you want us to have jeff bader join the meeting?
81;
81;"will all be gone tonight, we were waiting for meetings to finish.
can come around now"
81;
81;
81;
81;"""FRAUD"" IN CHAOTIC ELECTIONS, CALL FOR CANCELLATION"
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;From carlos
81;Will see u at office.
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Tuesday, September 21, 2010 4:55 PM
Blair note
NOTE
12 September 2010
PLAN A: Renew moratorium + game-changer for Israel
PLAN B: Less than full renewal + major CBMs for Palestinians"
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;"been released
Reza teghavi
Businessman from Los angeles jailed in same prison as hikers since 2008. Was accused of giving money to anti govt
group."
81;
81;"did she show up?
she might have been late with her last client"
81;
81;
81;
81;"I solved the mystery on ralph thomson, the ceo of international business catalysts, who sent you letter and mentioned
his export conference this fall. You met him at the business roundtable lunch lorraine hariton organized on july 16th for
you and bob hormats. Ralph was invited because they include all past ACE winners on the invitation list (he won in 2007)
and he runs a small/medium size business which is a group they target for these roundtables. Lorraines office is in touch
with him on who would be appropriate to attend his conference."
81;
81;
81;
81;"Purpose of Call:
Points to Raise:
Background: The Indian government tabled the nuclear liability legislation August 25, after which it was amended,
The bill, which has garnered front-page, daily news coverage, passed the upper house of parliament
with broad support on August 30.
Ambassador Roemer and Under Secretary Burns discussed our concerns again with National
Security Adviser Menon on August 27; we have requested that NSA Jones also call Menon. Embassy staff provided
specific recommendations for fixing the legislation to Mukherjee's staff, Prime Minister's Office and Ministry of External
Affairs on August 24."
81;"Nope, we r waiting for them to confirm.
Jon is bringing printout"
81;"He cannot do today
Maybe tomorrow morning"
81;"That was original plan but I changed it last night cause we have so much time to kill. And they were having access issues
there. But we can try to change back."
81;resumed
81;
81;
81;Points for corker call.
81;
81;
81;
81;"You asked about this. It was Walter Isaacson.
New BBG chief wants more money to combat ""enemies"" such as China and Russia Posted By Josh Rogin Tuesday,
October 5, 2010 - 4:43 PM
The Broadcasting Board of Governors (BBG) has a new chairman in Walter Isaacson, and the former CNN and Time
magazine chief is calling for even more money for the BBG to combat the public diplomacy efforts of America's
""enemies,"" which he identifies as Iran, Venezuela, Russia, and China.
The BBG, which oversees a $700 million annual budget to run such organizations as the Voice of America, Radio Free
Europe, and Radio Free Asia, funds breakthrough reporting in some of the most dangerous parts of the world, but at the
same time is facing increased competition from other governments' forays into international broadcasting.
Isaacson said that other countries are stepping up their international broadcasting efforts and that the Congress must
allow the U.S. government to do the same.
""We can't allow ourselves to be out-communicated by our enemies,"" he said. ""You've got Russia Today, Iran's Press TV,
Venezuela's TeleSUR, and of course, China is launching an international broadcasting 24-hour news channel with
correspondents around the world [and has] reportedly set aside six to ten billion [dollars] -- we've to go to Capitol Hill
with that number -- to expand their overseas media operations.""
Isaacson said that combating internet censorship would be a major focus of the BBG under his leadership and that China
and Iran were the prime targets.
""China, Iran, and other countries block democratic impulses using their later technologies, and Beijing has deployed
armies of cyber militias to go after their country's cyber dissidents,"" he said. ""The BBG is at the forefront of combating
this. Through constant innovation and technical evolution, our engineers are opening up the Internet gateway for
audiences in China and Iran.""
""We know where we stand in the fight for Internet freedom,"" Isaacson said. ""Wherever there is a firewall, it's our duty
to storm it, to denounce it and to circumvent it.""
Isaacson was speaking at last week's 60th anniversary celebration for Radio Free Europe, which he credited as
contributing to the end of the Cold War. He made it clear the BBG's outlets will stick to reporting the news objectively,
even if that conflicts with the foreign policy of the Obama administration.
""It's sometimes said that our international broadcasting is in a difficult position because by law and by tradition it's
tasked with two separate missions that might conflict: first of all, covering the news with the highest journalistic
standards and secondly, being a part of America's public diplomacy by accurately conveying its policies and values to the
world,"" Isaacson said.
""Let me say to you, my fellow journalists, that I will stress and we will stress the primacy of the first of these missions,
our mission of being credible journalists, because in fact, it's the only way to carry out the second mission. You can't do
it unless you're credible and telling the truth, and in the end, the truth is on our side.""
Pressed by The Cable to explain exactly what that means, especially in light of reports that the Obama administration
sought to influence BBG reporting after the disputed Iranian presidential elections, Isaacson promised he wouldn't
hesitate to air views that contradict American foreign policy on BBG stations.
He said that the goals of American foreign policy and the objectives of credible journalism overlap about 90 percent of
the time -- as for the other 10 percent, a choice must be made.
""I feel it's the role of the BBG to always make the choice on the side of credible journalism, just as you would in the
private sector,"" Isaacson said. ""We can never compromise our credibility. And in doing so, that will probably help further
the foreign policy interests of the United States. But if it's ever a real conflict, our goal one is to protect our credibility."""
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;In case u didn't see story?
81;"Ops update on sara shourd:
Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.goy>
Sunday, September 12, 2010 1:59 PM
1.4(B)
1.4(D)
B1
Per 0420 telcon with Embassy Bern CG Ed Birsner:
— Reason: 1.4(B), 1.4(D) — Declassify on: 09/12/2030"
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Thursday, September 23, 2010 11:47 AM
Wen
B1
1.4(B)
1.4(D)
on: 09/22/2025"
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;Do you want me to have faxed to you as well?
81;"9:30 korean fm confirmed
10am thai fm confirmed
And kouchner called asking to speak to you today."
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;"Jon davidson will print your press clips today.
Was going to have monica help marina tomorrow morning unless you don't need it."
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;Coming.
81;
81;
81;
81;From phil
81;Fyi
81;
81;
81;state
81;
81;"This is your day tomorrow. Anything you want to add or take off?
8:15 am DEPART Private Residence
En route State Department
[drive time: 10 minutes]
8:25 am ARRIVE State Department
8:25 am PRESIDENTIAL DAILY BRIEFING
8:30 am Secretary's Office
8:45 am DAILY SENIOR STAFF MEETING
9:15 am Secretary's Conference Room
Participants: Jack Lew, Pat Kennedy, P.J. Crowley, Cheryl Mills, Steve Mull,
Harold Koh, Anne-Marie Slaughter, Rich Verma and Joe Macmanus
9:15 am MONDAY MEETING w/ASSISTANT SECRETARIES
10:00 am Principals Conference Room 7516
10:00 am OFFICE TIME
11:30 am Secretary's Office
11:30 am VIDEOS
12:00 pm George Marshall Room, 7th Floor
Staff: Case
Note: Room reserved from 10:15 am to 12:00 pm
- International Education Week
- FINCA 25th Anniversary
- Mobile Money Policy Forum
- Freedom Fields USA Gala
12:00 pm OFFICE TIME
2:00 pm Secretary's Office
2:00 pm STAFF MEETING*
3:00 pm Secretary's Outer Office
Participants: Ellen Tauscher, Jack Lew, Cheryl Mills, Philippe Reines, Jake Sullivan, Derek Chollet, Kurt Campbell, Rich
Verma
Note: Meeting called for 2:00 pm"
81;Want to make sure you both got this
81;Yes
81;
81;
81;"Been a pretty slow day. Can u reply all on this email?
- dennis ross asking to do secure call at 9:30 instead of 10.1s that ok?
- bill burns wants to give you trip download in person so he will come see you monday.
- I just got a call sheet for netanyahu which I'm told you may do over weekend.
- I sent draft remarks for dorothy height service for your review.
- geoff morell just reported that wash post is going to run your/gates start oped on monday.
- also a new call list coming your way. Only new call is ted deutch returned your call. The rest of the outstanding foreign
calls are in your folder but we haven't done anything with them.
- I connected with today who said offered to keep her job for 2 more years. still seems inclined to want
to come to you but I encouraged her to stay
- we got our allotment for wh holiday tour tickets so we have been offering to people
- I saw jen hanley today who is doing very very well and sends her best to you."
81;"Call confirmed for 930
Bill wants to do in person
Netanyahu letter still isn't done, just checked. Will get to u when it is."
81;Aiming to send monday for tues delivery.
81;Looks like both of them can do monday night. Krystal confirming. Sunday might be better for her.
81;"Ill offer
Also, did u see statement from dan schwerin on aung san suu kyi? Are u ok with it?"
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;Asking.
81;Cannot do 8:30am.
81;
81;
81;Done.
81;
81;What do u think about calling mcconnell?
81;Ok. Rich confirms we got Nides, Brownfield, the MCC reps, and the UNGA reps. USAID got Paige Alexander.
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;Yes of course.
81;
81;Blair just finished with BN. He wants to talk to both of you and is available from now on.
81;"Added jake to manifest
Just realized tomicah is on his way to astana to prep for osce."
81;
81;Toms office has called a few times about secure fax they need you to see before the call. We are going to send it shortly.
81;10:30 call on cisco. They will call u at 10:25am to add u.
81;
81;
81;
81;Wow
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;"Howard Berman: yes
Ileana Ros-Lehtinen: yes
Nita Lowey: yes
Ike Skelton: yes
John Spratt: yes
Richard Durbin: yes
John Kerry: yes
Richard Lugar: yes
Thad Cochran: yes
Judd Gregg: no
Nancy Pelosi: no
Steny Hoyer: no
John Boehner: no
Eric Cantor: no
Kay Granger: no
Howard McKeon: no
Paul Ryan: no
Harry Reid: no
Mitch McConnell: no
Jon Kyl: tbd
David Obey: tbd
Jerry Lewis: tbd
Daniel K. Inouye: tbd
Patrick Leahy: tbd
Carl Levin: tbd
John McCain: tbd
Kent Conrad: tbd"
81;
81;"He called again saying he needs to talk before 2pm.
Do you want jeff to return?"
81;
81;
81;
81;"I've left message for roy for 9am.
10:00am UNSC Session on Counter-Terrorism (UN)
S+4; Amb. Rice, A/S Brimmer, Amb. Benjamin, Amb. DiCarlo (Deputy PermRep)
-- Intervention by the Secretary
S is 3rd speaker (can then depart)
12:45pm Bilat with UK FS Hague (Waldorf-Astoria) (30 mins.)
S, A/S Gordon, S/CT Benjamin, PA, Sullivan, EUR notetake r);.- Press: Pooled camera spray >- Public Remarks:
N/a
1:30pm Bilat with Canadian FM Cannon (Waldorf-Astoria) (30 mins.)
S, A/S Valenzuela, S/CT Benjamin, PA, Sullivan, WHAnotetaker
Press: Pooled camera spray>.
2:00pm Meeting with Pacific Island Nation Leaders (Waldorf-Astoria) (45 mins.; informal opening/25 mins. meeting)
S, A/S Campbell, A/S Brimmer, Admin. Shah, PA, Sullivan, EAP notetaker
-- Opening remarks by the Secretary
-- Response by President of Nauru, Marcus Stephen
-- Discussion
>- Press: Pooled camera spray
3:00pm Bilat with Indian FM Krishna (Waldorf-Astoria) (30 mins.)
S, P, Amb. Rice, A/S Blake, A/S Brimmer, S/CT Benjamin, PA, Sullivan, SCA notetaker
• Press: Pooled camera spray>-
3:45pm Bilat with Syrian FM Muallim (Waldorf-Astoria) (30 mins.)
S, P, A/S Feltman, SEMEP Mitchell, PA, Sullivan, NEA notetaker
• Press: Pooled camera sprap-
4:30pm Bilat with French FM Kouchner (Waldorf-Astoria) (30 mins.)
S. A/S Gordon, PA, Sullivan, EUR notetaker
›- Press: Pooled camera spray›-
6:00pm Depart NYC for Washington"
81;
81;Washington
81;
81;"Their secure lines are still down
But ops now has a non-secure line they can connect you to if u want to make the call in between bilats."
81;"Not sure why, but ds took your luggage out of van to go ahead to airport. Very odd and they just told me they did it.
I told them to return the oscar gowns to van and all little bags are still in van too."
81;"Just heard from Israelis
They said he's not feeling great and wants to turn in Wants to do call in next 5 min or not do today. Can u guys do?"
81;"Confirmed its a 4 hour drive there.
We could also get a plane from white plains. Would be an hour and 15 from andrews. Let me know what u prefer."
81;
81;What do u think?
81;
81;
81;"Margo 6am
Isabelle 730
Enjoy time with Glad she came. B6"
81;"I talked to isabelle and explained the issue, she agreed and will speak with kristal.
Kristal is confirmed for 6:30am
Isabelle confirmed for 7:30am
We will figure out kristy tomorrow."
81;
81;to begin Chicago mayor bid
81;"Abedin, Huma <AbedinH@state.gov>
Tuesday, October 26, 2010 8:00 PM
Fw: Note for HRC from Bono and All
Fyi"
81;"I have a letter
III leave at house for you when u r out to dinner."
81;
81;
81;Fyi.
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;"Joe just gave me point
Hrc has complete packet"
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;B6
81;
81;B6
81;
81;
81;
81;Yes.
81;
81;Update from phil
81;FROM WIKILEAKS FOUNDER ASSANGE
81;
81;-----
81;
81;
81;
81;"Jake suggesting we do a condolence call to netanyahu and offer assistance. Ok?
Israel rescuers: forest fire leaves about 40 dead JERUSALEM (AP) - Israel's national rescue service said about 40 people
died in the wake of a massive forest fire in northern Israel. The blaze, which has torched some 1,600 acres, remains out
of control."
81;
81;
81;
81;
81;Ok
81;
81;"will move saeb
Bibi confirmed 12:30. Does that give u enough time?"
81;"STATEMENT BY PHILIP J. CROWLEY
ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF STATE FOR PUBLIC AFFAIRS
Update on Ambassador Richard Holbrooke
Ambassador Richard Holbrooke was admitted to George Washington University Hospital yesterday. This morning,
doctors completed surgery to repair a tear in his aorta. He is in critical condition and has been joined by his family.
# # #"
81;"STATEMENT BY SECRETARY CLINTON
The Cancun Agreements
Over the last year, the United States has worked with our international partners to build on the progress achieved at the
climate change conference in Copenhagen. We have pressed for substantive steps that would advance the vision of the
Copenhagen Accord. This month we joined the nations of the world in Cancun for a new round of talks aimed at
mobilizing common action to meet the shared global challenge of climate change.
Today I am pleased to announce that we secured the Cancun Agreements, a set of balanced international decisions
under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCC) which represent meaningful progress in
our global response to climate change.
These agreements advance each of the core elements of the Copenhagen Accord: They anchor the Accord's mitigation
pledges; build on a system of transparency with substantial detail and content of International Consultations and
Analysis which will provide confidence that a country's pledges are being carried out; launch a new Green Climate Fund;
create a framework to reduce deforestation in developing countries; establish a technology mechanism; and Setup a
framework and committee to will promote international cooperation and action on adaptation.
The Cancun Agreements represent a balanced and significant step forward. In the days and months ahead, the United
States will work with our friends and partners to keep the world focused on this urgent challenge and to continue
building on this progress.
###"
81;
81;
81;
81;this
81;"Huma Abedin <Huma@clintonemail.com>
Monday, December 13, 2010 10:27 PM
H; 'abedinh@state.gov'
Re: want to stop
He"
81;
81;"That was what lona had when she went in to talk to u.
But that's changed now obviously."
81;
81;
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
145;"H; cheryl.mills
Crowley, Philip J; preines
RE: WPost editorial
; Sullivan, Jacob J
We will draft a response and get it to you. We are also compiling other commentary -- most of which has been very
favorable. In a series of meetings we have had with the democracy and human rights groups, the response has been
overwhelmingly positive."
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
87;
87;FYI
87;"Fyi
B6
— —"
87;Fyi
87;This is nice.
87;B5
87;Will do.
87;FYI
87;FYI
87;"Fyi
--"
87;"My lYi was referring to the Libyan. The arming the rebels breathlessness is silly.
—"
87;"Will do.
Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Monday, October 1, 2012 3:37 PM
RE: H: Romney's last gambit Got done and published. Sid"
87;"This is it. Pretty uncompelling piece if you ask me, but of course I'm biased.
Mitt Romney: A New Course for the Middle East
Restore the three sinews of American influence: our economic strength, our military strength and the strength of our values.
Disturbing developments are sweeping across the greater Middle East. In Syria, tens of thousands of innocent people have been slaughtered. In Egypt, the Muslim
Brotherhood has come to power, and the country's peace treaty with Israel hangs In the balance. In Libya, our ambassador was murdered In a terrorist attack. U.S.
embassies throughout the region have been stormed in violent protests. And in Iran, the ayatollahs continue to move full tilt toward nuclear-weapons capability, all
the while promising to annihilate Israel.
These developments are not, as President Obama says, mere ""bumps in the road."" They are major issues that put our security at risk.
Yet amid this upheaval, our country seems to be at the mercy of events rather than shaping them. We're not moving them in a direction that protects our people or
our allies.
And that's dangerous. If the Middle East descends into chaos, if Iran moves toward nuclear breakout, or if Israel's security is compromised, America could be
pulled into the maelstrom.
We still have time to address these threats, but it will require a new strategy toward the Middle East
The first step is to understand how we got here. Since World War II, America has been the leader of the Free World. We're unique in having earned that role not
through conquest but through promoting human rights, free markets and the rule of law. We ally ourselves with like-minded countries, expand prosperity through
trade and keep the peace by maintaining a military second to none.
But in recent years, President Obama has allowed our leadership to atrophy. Our economy is stuck in a ""recovery"" that barely deserves the name. Our national
debt has risen to record levels. Our military, tested by a decade of war, is facing devastating cuts thanks to the budgetary games played by the White House.
Finally, our values have been misapplied—and misunderstood—by a president who thinks that weakness will win favor with our adversaries.
By failing to maintain the elements of our influence and by stepping away from our allies, President Obama has heightened the prospect of conflict and instability.
He does not understand that an American policy that lacks resolve can provoke aggression and encourage disorder.
The Middle East is a case in point. The Arab Spring presented an opportunity to help move millions of people from oppression to freedom. But it also presented
grave risks. We needed a strategy for success, but the president offered none. And now he seeks to downplay the significance of the calamities of the past few
weeks
The same incomprehension afflicts the president's policy toward Israel. The president began his term with the explicit policy of creating ""daylight"" between our two
countries. He recently downgraded Israel from being our ""closest ally"" in the Middle East to being only ""one of our closest allies."" It's a diplomatic message that will
be received clearly by Israel and its adversaries alike. He dismissed Israel's concerns about Iran as mere ""noise"" that he prefers to ""block out."" And at a time when
Israel needs America to stand with it, he declined to meet with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu.
In this period of uncertainty, we need to apply a coherent strategy of supporting our partners in the Middle East—that is, both governments and individuals who
share our values.
This means restoring our credibility with Iran. When we say an Iranian nuclear-weapons capability—and the regional instability that comes with it--is unacceptable,
the ayatollahs must be made to believe us.
It means placing no daylight between the United States and Israel, And it means using the full spectrum of our soft power to encourage liberty and opportunity for
those who have for too long known only corruption and oppression. The dignity of work and the ability to steer the course of their lives are the best alternatives to
extremism.
But this Middle East policy will be undermined unless we restore the three sinews of our influence: our economic strength, our military strength and the strength Of
our values. That will require a very different set of policies from those President Obama is pursuing.
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739629
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045554
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739629
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
The 20th century became an American Century because we were steadfast in defense of freedom. We made the painful sacrifices necessary to defeat
totalitarianism In all of Its guises.. To defend ourselves and our allies, we paid the price in treasure and in soldiers who never came home.
Our challenges are different now, but if the 21st century is to be another American Century, we need leaders who understand that keeping the peace requires
American strength in all of its dimensions.
Mr. Romney is the Republican Pady candidate for president
A version of this article appeared October 1,2012, on page .A.15 in the U.S. edition of The WallStreet Journal, with the headline: A
New course for the Middle East."
87;"FYI — should take care of the job.
Prom: Rhodes, Benjamin 1
Sent Wednesday, March 30, 2011 8:15 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob]; Reines, Philippe
Subject FIN: Statement by the Press Secretary
B6"
87;
87;"Was supposed to go today. Will check.
---"
87;Fyi
87;"FYI —Jeff and I discussed and I fully agree that a NATO liaison is a good idea.
Prom: Feibran, Jeffrey D
Sent: Friday, April 08, 2011 3:06 PM
To: Daaider, Ivo H; 0112, Gene A; Polaschlk, Joan A; Gordon, Philip H; Roebuck, William V; Keene, Matt E; Dibble,
Elizabeth L
CC: Sullivan. Jacob); Schikher, Ronald L; Sanderson, Janet A; Djerassi, Alexander M;
Heffern, John A; Degnan, Kelly C
Subject: RE: Itenghazi and NATO
Ivo, thanks for the helpful response. From NEA's perspective, an operational liaison with the TNC does
not constitute formal, legal recognition of the INC as the government of Libya. We don't consider
Chris Stevens' presence in Benghazi to trigger formal recognition, and we've never broken relations
with Libya despite suspending our embassy operations.
Without question, having a NATO liaison in Benghazi would have the appearance of NATO leaning in
the direction of the INC. But NATO's operations already show a considerable lean away from
Qadhati. Speaking for NEA, I don't mind the appearance. But the real purpose would be to avoid
friendly fire incidents, of course.
Cheers,
Jeff
Jeffrey Fettman
Assistant Secretary
Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs
Department of State
202-6474209
,,,, ....."
87;"Will do.
Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sunday, October 7, 2012 12:29 PM
Re: H: Great to see you. Drop in again. Here's Libya. Sid"
87;"Attachment= HRC @ CSIS - v4.docx
Sorry we were a couple hours late!"
87;Survive, yes. Pat helped level set things tonight and we'll see where we are in the morning.
87;"B5
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739677
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045651"
87;Here you go
87;FYI
87;"RELEASE IN
PART B6
Strikes me as a little strange. But certainly disturbing. I will pass info on.
Prom: H [mailto:HDR220dintonernall.corn]
Sent: Friday, May 06, 2011 01:52 AM
To: Sullivan, Jacob)
Subject: Fw: H: USL, AQ & Libya. Sid
More to pass on--disturbing, if true.
From
Sent: Monday, May 02, 2011 09:12 AM
To: H
Subject: H: UBL, AQ & Libya. Sid
B6
May 2, 2011
For: Hillary"
87;"Here is Susan on this week. She wasn't asked about whether we had any intel. But she did make clear our
view that this started spontaneously and then evolved. The only troubling sentence relates to the
investigation, specifically: And we'll see when the investigation unfolds whether what was -- what
transpired in Benghazi might have unfolded differently in different circumstances."" But she got pushed
there.
Waiting on other transcripts.
For more on what happened and why, let's bring in the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, Dr. Susan
Rice. Dr. Rice, thank you for joining us.
RICE: Good to be with you, Jake.
TAPPER: So, first of all, what is the latest you can tell us on who these attackers were at the embassy or at
the consulate in Benghazi? We're hearing that the Libyans have arrested people. They're saying that some
people involved were from outside the country, that there might have even been Al Qaida ties. What's the
latest information?
RICE: Well, Jake, first of all, it's important to know that there's an FBI investigation that has begun and
will take some time to be completed. That will tell us with certainty what transpired.
But our current best assessment, based on the information that we have at present, is that, in fact, what
this began as, it was a spontaneous -- not a premeditated -- response to what had transpired in Cairo. In
Cairo, as you know, a few hours earlier, there was a violent protest that was undertaken in reaction to this
very offensive video that was disseminated.
We believe that folks in Benghazi, a small number of people came to the embassy to -- or to the consulate,
rather, to replicate the sort of challenge that was posed in Cairo. And then as that unfolded, it seems to
have been hijacked, let us say, by some individual clusters of extremists who came with heavier weapons,
weapons that as you know in -- in the wake of the revolution in Libya are -- are quite common and
accessible. And it then evolved from there.
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739704
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045373
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739704
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
We'll wait to see exactly what the investigation finally confirms, but that's the best information we have at
present.
TAPPER: Why was there such a security breakdown? Why was there not better security at the compound
in Benghazi? Why were there not U.S. Marines at the embassy in Tripoli?
RICE: Well, first of all, we had a substantial security presence with our personnel...
TAPPER: Not substantial enough, though, right?
RICE: ... with our personnel and the consulate in Benghazi. Tragically, two of the four Americans who
were killed were there providing security. That was their function. And indeed, there were many other
colleagues who were doing the same with them.
It obviously didn't prove sufficient to the -- the nature of the attack and sufficient in that -- in that
moment. And that's why, obviously, we have reinforced our remaining presence in Tripoli and why the
president has very -- been very clear that in Libya and throughout the region we are going to call on the
governments, first of all, to assume their responsibilities to protect our facilities and our personnel, and
we're reinforcing our facilities and our -- our embassies where possible...
TAPPER: But why...
RICE: ... and where needed.
TAPPER: Why would we not have Marines at the embassy in Tripoli to begin with? It would seem like this
-- this is obviously an unstable country. This is a region where U.S. interests have been attacked in
previous months. Why were there not Marines there to begin with?
RICE: First of all, there are Marines in some places around the world. There are not Marines in every
facility. That depends on the circumstances. That depends on the requirements. Our presence in Tripoli,
as in Benghazi, is relatively new, as you will recall. We've been back post-revolution only for a matter of
months.
But I've visited there myself, both to Tripoli and Benghazi. I was very grateful to have a strong security
presence with me as part of our -- our embassy detachment there. So we certainly are aware that Libya is a
place where there have been increasingly some violent incidents. The security personnel that the State
Department thought were required were in place. And we'll see when the investigation unfolds whether
what was -- what transpired in Benghazi might have unfolded differently in different circumstances.
But the president has been very clear. The protection of American personnel and facilities is and will
remain our top priority. That's why we've reinforced our presence in Tripoli and elsewhere.
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739704
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045374
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739704
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
TAPPER: Look at this map, if you would. There have been protests around the world over the last several
days. And President Obama pledged to repair America's relationships with the Muslim world. Why does
the U.S. seem so impotent? And why is the U.S. even less popular today in some of these Muslim and Arab
countries than it was four years ago?
RICE: Jake, we're not impotent. We're not even less popular, to challenge that assessment. I don't know
on what basis you make that judgment. But let me -- let me point...
TAPPER: It just seems that the U.S. government is powerless as this -- as this maelstrom erupts.
RICE: It's actually the opposite. First of all, let's be clear about what transpired here. What happened this
week in Cairo, in Benghazi, in many other parts of the region...
TAPPER: Tunisia, Khartoum...
RICE: ... was a result a direct result of a heinous and offensive video that was widely disseminated, that
the U.S. government had nothing to do with, which we have made clear is reprehensible and disgusting.
We have also been very clear in saying that there is no excuse for violence, there is -- that we have
condemned it in the strongest possible terms.
But let's look at what's happened. It's quite the opposite of being impotent. We have worked with the
governments in Egypt. President Obama picked up the phone and talked to President Morsi in Egypt. And
as soon as he did that, the security provided to our personnel in our embassies dramatically increased.
President Morsi...
TAPPER: It took two days for President Morsi to say anything about this.
RICE: President Morsi has been out repeatedly and said that he condemns this violence. He's called off --
and his people have called off any further demonstrations and have made very clear that this has to stop.
(CROSSTALK)
RICE: Now, and and same, frankly, in Tunisia, in Yemen, and, of course, in Libya, where the
government has -- has gone out of its way to try to step up security and express deepest remorse for what
has happened. We are quite popular in Libya, as you might expect, having been a major partner in their
revolution. What transpired outside of our consulate in Benghazi was not an expression of deep-seated
anti-Americanism on the part of the Libyan people. Quite the contrary. The counter-demonstrations, the
outpouring of sympathy and support for Ambassador Stevens and for the United States, the government
of Libya and -- and the people on the street saying how pained they are by this, is much more a reflection
of the sentiment towards the United States than a small handful of heavily armed mobsters.
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739704
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045375
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739704
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
TAPPER: That certainly, according to polling, is the case in Libya. Not the case in Egypt. And since you
brought up President Morsi, let me try to get some clarification on something. President Obama was asked
about the relationship with Egypt on Wednesday, and this is what he said.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
OBAMA: I don't think that we would consider them an ally, but we don't consider them an enemy. They
are a new government that is trying to find its way.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
TAPPER: The United States has sent billions of dollars of U.S. taxpayer money to Egypt over the last few
decades. And by definition, as you know, according to the State Department, Egypt is a major non-NATO
ally of the United States. Why would President Obama say Egypt is not an ally?
RICE: Well, first of all, the president has been very clear and -- and everybody understands that Egypt is a
very critical partner of the United States, has long been so. That relationship remains the same, and the
president wasn't signaling any change in -- in the nature...
TAPPER: Was he trying to nudge Morsi?
RICE: The president wasn't signaling any change in the nature of our relationship. Obviously, the
president had a conversation with President Morsi and a very productive one, in which he underscored
that it's, of course, the responsibility of the Egyptian government as host to protect diplomatic personnel
and facilities, including our own, and we saw that President Morsi, immediately after that, took dramatic
steps to improve the security of our facilities in Cairo and elsewhere, and then went out and repeatedly
made a number of very important and powerful statements condemning the violence and conveying the
message that, however hateful such a video may be, there is absolutely no justification for violence against
the United States or other Western partners.
So what we've seen is that the president has been incredibly calm, incredibly steady, and incredibly
measured in his approach to this set of developments. And his interventions, his leadership has ensured
that in Egypt, in Yemen, in Tunisia, in Libya, and many other parts of the world, that leaders have come
out and made very plain that there's no excuse for this violence. We heard Prime Minister Erdogan of
Turkey say the same, we heard the Grand Mufti in Saudi Arabia say the same, that there's no excuse for
violence, that violence is to be condemned, and that governments have a responsibility to protect United
States personnel and facilities and those of all foreign diplomats.
TAPPER: I know you have to go, but very quickly, was the president in that interview trying to nudge
President Morsi, ""Get your act together""?
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739704
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045376
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739704
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
RICE: No. I think that the president communicated directly with -- with President Morsi and had the
opportunity to -- to understand our expectation that Egypt will do what it can to protect our facilities. So
that -- that was conveyed very directly, and the results were immediate and quite satisfactory.
TAPPER: Dr. Rice, thank you so much for coming here today and answering our questions.
RICE: Good to be with you.
END
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739704
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045377"
87;Good.
87;Nothing to this one.
87;Interesting.
87;"There is credible threat info against the hotel that our team is using - and the rest of the Intl community is using, for that
matter. DS going to evacuate our people to alt locations. Info suggested attack in next 24-48 hours. Will keep you
posted.
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739724
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045085"
87;"Will do.
Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sunday, September 16, 2012 2:41 PM
Re: 'Meet the Press Transcript: U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations Susan Rice"
87;"The whole thing is worth a read, but a very tough judge gives you and the President credit:
By any standard of reason, President Obama and Secretary of State Canton conducted themselves very well amid the
confusion and crises Of course they didn't do everything perfectly; for example, some unidentified administration official
disowned the embassy statement condemning the video. Such creepiness served only to make it look like Obama was
running for cover at the expense of our embattled diplomats. But minor miscues aside, Obama and Clinton nailed the
main points, especially Clinton. In her first statement soon after the riots, here s what she said The United States
deplores any intentional effort to denigrate the religious beliefs of others. Our commitment to religious tolerance goes back
to the very beginning of our nation. But let me be clear There is never any justification for violent acts of this kind.""
http://vvvvw.thedailybeast.corniarticles/2012/09/17/leslie-h-eelb-on-the-mvsteries-of-the-middle-east-riots.html
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739737
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045408"
87;Already working on it with Eric S., Jeremy B., and NSS.
87;"Apparently wants to see you to tallk Libya/weapons.
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739759
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045104"
87;"Sorry — I've been flat out. (And I've agreed to have dinner with Anne-Marie at 7!)
1. Well get you a new CGI draft tomorrow morning for you to noodle on. Feel free to'call when you've looked at it
and we can talk about other directions if it doesn't feel right.
2, Tom met with Barak today; I will get readout from Sam V tomorrow afternoon. Wendy is going to write points
for you.
3. Yousef called to say now that Jeff is gone ABZ has no one to talk to on a regular basis and asked if he could talk
to Bill Burns.
4. Ben Rhodes sent me the draft UNGA speech which I will forward to you shortly.
5. Bill/Wendy are currently in a SVTC on some information that they may want to report to you on — but unclear
whether there is anything to it.
6. We've nailed down a $15 mm non-lethal support and $15 mm humanitarian support announcement for next
Friday's Friends of Syria meeting.
7. Hold on Rick Olson was lifted by Paul.
8. Protestors stormed Ansar al Shade's headquarters in Benghazi, and a huge number marched against militias.
9. 1 saw Dennis Ross today for one of our S/P sessions. I can fill you in on the latest on his effort. Also, he will send
you some stuff in advance of your relevant meetings (he was just in Israel).
That's the key stuff for now. More medium-range stuff to discuss in NY.
From H [mallto:HDR22@dintonernall.comj
Sent: Friday, September 21, 2012 6:08 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob
Subject: Anything to report?
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739760
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045423"
87;"B5
Megan is working on a development speech but please read the below if you can this afternoon.
Let me know your thoughts.
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739767
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045428
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739767
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
ED
B5
UNCLASSIF
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739767
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045429
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739767
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
B5
UNCLASSIF
U.S. Departm
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739767
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
ED
ent of State
STATE-5CB0045430
B5
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739767
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739767
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045431
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739767
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
B5
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739767 STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
Date: 05/13/2015 SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045432
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739767
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
B5
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739767
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045433
B5
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739767
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739767
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045434
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739767
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
202-431-6498 ° B5
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739767
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045435
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739767
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
202-431-6498 B5
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739767
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045436
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739767
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
B5
202431 -6498
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739767
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045437
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739767
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
202-431-6498 B5
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739767
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045438
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739767
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
202431-6498
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739767
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045439
B5
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739767
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
202-431-6498 B5
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739767
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045440
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739767
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
202-431-6498 B5
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739767
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045441
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739767
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
202-431-6498 B5
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739767
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045442"
87;Roger, will do.
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ©stategove
Wednesday, September 14, 2011 10:26 AM
FW: Quick readout from Jeff Feltman in Neal '
RELEASE IN PART B5,B3
INA,B6
FYI — worth a scan."
87;Will do.
87;Fyi
87;"FYI
. •
From FeItrnan, Jeffrey D
Sent: Friday, January 06,, 2012 1:55 AM
To: Sullivan, Jacob J; Cret2, Gene A
Cc: Bums, William 3
Subject: Re: HRC friend
Illhave to defer to Gene on this. It's a fascinating read, and some stuff mentioned has already happened (such as the
appointment ofiuwaili as Minister of Defense Juwaili is close to the UAE, incidentally). But I simply do not know the
ins and outs of the new Libyan politics in sufficient detail to give a view as to the accuracy of this report A few bits
seemed off key (e.g, the reference that both the misrata and Zintan Brigades once reported ""loosely"" to BelHaj I don't
believe is true, since Juwaili and the IJAE supported the latter and Qatar the former).
The comment about Belhaj staying out of govt and thus retain the flexibility to carp and make trouble: Jake, you may
remember that AbZ warned exactly of that danger in that weird mtg Qatar insisted upon on the margins of UNGA.
Gene?
Jeffrey Feltman"
87;"FYI latest.
Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Monday, January 9, 2012 12:37 PM
FW: HRC friend"
87;"Attached is full compilation. You never said spontaneous or characterized the motives. in fact you were careful in your
first statement to say we were assessing motive and method. The way you treated the video in the Libya context was to
say that some sought to *justify* the attack on that basis.
From Valliani, Amira
Sent: Monday, September 24, 2012 10:08 AM
To: Sullivan, Jacob 3
Subject: Berthazi/protest statements
Attached
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045474
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
Statement on the Attack in Benghazi
September 11, 2012
I condemn in the strongest terms the attack on our mission in Benghazi today. As we work to
secure our personnel and facilities, we have confirmed that one of our State Department officers
was killed. We are heartbroken by this terrible loss. Our thoughts and prayers are with his family
and those who have suffered in this attack.
This evening, I called Libyan President Magariaf to coordinate additional support to protect
Americans in Libya. President Magariaf expressed his condemnation and condolences and
pledged his government's full cooperation.
Some have sought to justify this vicious behavior as a response to inflammatory material posted
on the Internet. The United States deplores any intentional effort to denigrate the religious beliefs
of others. Our commitment to religious tolerance goes back to the very beginning of our nation.
But let me be clear: There is never any justification for violent acts of this kind.
In light of the events of today, the United States government is working with partner countries
around the world to protect our personnel, our missions, and American citizens worldwide.
Statement on the Death of American Personnel in Benghazi, Libya
September 12, 2012
It is with profound sadness that I share the news of the death of four American personnel in
Benghazi, Libya yesterday. Among them were United States Ambassador to Libya Chris Stevens
and Foreign Service Information Management Officer, Sean Smith. We are still making next of
kin notifications for the other two individuals. Our hearts go out to all their families and
colleagues.
A 21 year veteran of the Foreign Service, Ambassador Stevens died last night from injuries he
sustained in the attack on our office in Benghazi.
I had the privilege of swearing in Chris for his post in Libya only a few months ago. He spoke
eloquently about his passion for service, for diplomacy and for the Libyan people. This
assignment was only the latest in his more than two decades of dedication to advancing closer
ties with the people of the Middle East and North Africa which began as a Peace Corps
Volunteer in Morocco. As the conflict in Libya unfolded, Chris was one of the first Americans
on the ground in Benghazi. He risked his own life to lend the Libyan people a helping hand to
build the foundation for a new, free nation. He spent every day since helping to finish the work
that he started. Chris was committed to advancing America's values and interests, even when
that meant putting himself in danger.
Sean Smith was a husband and a father of two, who joined the Department ten years ago. Like
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045475
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
Chris, Sean was one of our best. Prior to arriving in Benghazi, he served in Baghdad, Pretoria,
Montreal, and most recently The Hague.
All the Americans we lost in yesterday's attacks made the ultimate sacrifice. We condemn this
vicious and violent attack that took their lives, which they had committed to helping the Libyan
people reach for a better future.
America's diplomats and development experts stand on the front lines every day for our country.
We are honored by the service of each and every one of them.
Remarks on the Deaths of American Personnel in Benghazi, Libya
September 12, 2012
Yesterday, our U.S. diplomatic post in Benghazi, Libya was attacked. Heavily armed militants
assaulted the compound and set fire to our buildings. American and Libyan security personnel
battled the attackers together. Four Americans were killed. They included Sean Smith, a Foreign
Service information management officer, and our Ambassador to Libya Chris Stevens. We are
still making next of kin notifications for the other two individuals.
This is an attack that should shock the conscience of people of all faiths around the world. We
condemn in the strongest terms this senseless act of violence, and we send our prayers to the
families, friends, and colleagues of those we've lost.
All over the world, every day, America's diplomats and development experts risk their lives in
the service of our country and our values, because they believe that the United States must be a
force for peace and progress in the world, that these aspirations are worth striving and sacrificing
for. Alongside our men and women in uniform, they represent the best traditions of a bold and
generous nation.
In the lobby of this building, the State Department, the names of those who have fallen in the line
of duty are inscribed in marble. Our hearts break over each one. And now, because of this
tragedy, we have new heroes to honor and more friends to mourn.
Chris Stevens fell in love with the Middle East as a young Peace Corps volunteer teaching
English in Morocco. He joined the Foreign Service, learned languages, won friends for America
in distant places, and made other people's hopes his own.
In the early days of the Libyan revolution, I asked Chris to be our envoy to the rebel opposition.
He arrived on a cargo ship in the port of Benghazi and began building our relationships with
Libya's revolutionaries. He risked his life to stop a tyrant, then gave his life trying to help build a
better Libya. The world needs more Chris Stevenses. I spoke with his sister, Ann, this morning,
and told her that he will be remembered as a hero by many nations.
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045476
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
Sean Smith was an Air Force veteran. He spent 10 years as an information management officer
in the State Department, he was posted at The Hague, and was in Libya on a brief temporary
assignment. He was a husband to his wife Heather, with whom I spoke this morning. He was a
father to two young children, Samantha and Nathan. They will grow up being proud of the
service their father gave to our country, service that took him from Pretoria to Baghdad, and
finally to Benghazi.
The mission that drew Chris and Sean and their colleagues to Libya is both noble and necessary,
and we and the people of Libya honor their memory by carrying it forward. This is not easy.
Today, many Americans are asking — indeed, I asked myself— how could this happen? How
could this happen in a country we helped liberate, in a city we helped save from destruction?
This question reflects just how complicated and, at times, how confounding the world can be.
But we must be clear-eyed, even in our grief. This was an attack by a small and savage group —
not the people or Government of Libya. Everywhere Chris and his team went in Libya, in a
country scarred by war and tyranny, they were hailed as friends and partners. And when the
attack came yesterday, Libyans stood and fought to defend our post. Some were wounded.
Libyans carried Chris' body to the hospital, and they helped rescue and lead other Americans to
safety. And last night, when I spoke with the President of Libya, he strongly condemned the
violence and pledged every effort to protect our people and pursue those responsible.
The friendship between our countries, borne out of shared struggle, will not be another casualty
of this attack. A free and stable Libya is still in America's interest and security, and we will not
turn our back on that, nor will we rest until those responsible for these attacks are found and
brought to justice. We are working closely with the Libyan authorities to move swiftly and
surely. We are also working with partners around the world to safeguard other American
embassies, consulates, and citizens.
There will be more time later to reflect, but today, we have work to do. There is no higher
priority than protecting our men and women wherever they serve. We are working to determine
the precise motivations and methods of those who carried out this assault. Some have sought to
justify this vicious behavior, along with the protest that took place at our Embassy in Cairo
yesterday, as a response to inflammatory material posted on the intemet. America's commitment
to religious tolerance goes back to the very beginning of our nation. But let me be clear — there is
no justification for this, none. Violence like this is no way to honor religion or faith. And as long
as there are those who would take innocent life in the name of God, the world will never know a
true and lasting peace.
It is especially difficult that this happened on September I I th. It's an anniversary that means a
great deal to all Americans. Every year on that day, we are reminded that our work is not yet
finished, that the job of putting an end to violent extremism and building a safe and stable world
continues. But September 11th means even more than that. It is a day on which we remember
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045477
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
thousands of American heroes, the bonds that connect all Americans, wherever we are on this
Earth, and the values that see us through every storm. And now it is a day on which we will
remember Sean, Chris, and their colleagues.
May God bless them, and may God bless the thousands of Americans working in every corner of
the world who make this country the greatest force for peace, prosperity, and progress, and a
force that has always stood for human dignity — the greatest force the world has ever known. And
may God continue to bless the United States of America.
Thank you.
Statement on the Deaths of Tyrone S. Woods and Glen A. Doherty in Benghazi, Libya
September 13, 2012
The attack on our diplomatic post in Benghazi, Libya on Tuesday claimed the lives of four
Americans. Yesterday, I spoke about two: Ambassador Chris Stevens and Information
Management Officer Sean Smith. Today, we also recognize the two security personnel who died
helping protect their colleagues. Tyrone S. Woods and Glen A. Doherty were both decorated
military veterans who served our country with honor and distinction. Our thoughts, prayers, and
deepest gratitude are with their families and friends. Our embassies could not carry on our
critical work around the world without the service and sacrifice of brave people like Tyrone and
Glen.
Tyrone's friends and colleagues called him ""Rone,"" and they relied on his courage and skill,
honed over two decades as a Navy SEAL. In uniform, he served multiple tours in Iraq and
Afghanistan. Since 2010, he protected American diplomatic personnel in dangerous posts from
Central America to the Middle East. He had the hands of a healer as well as the arm of a warrior,
earning distinction as a registered nurse and certified paramedic. All our hearts go out to
Tyrone's wife Dorothy and his three sons, Tyrone Jr., Hunter, and Kai, who was born just a few
months ago.
We also grieve for Glen Doherty, called Bub, and his family: his father Bernard, his mother
Barbara, his brother Gregory, and his sister Kathleen. Glen was also a former Navy SEAL and an
experienced paramedic. And he put his life on the line many times, protecting Americans in Iraq,
Afghanistan, and other hotspots. In the end, he died the way he lived — with selfless honor and
unstinting valor.
We condemn the attack that took the lives of these heroes in the strongest terms, and we are
taking additional steps to safeguard American embassies, consulates, and citizens around the
world. This violence should shock the conscience of people of all faiths and traditions. We
appreciate the statements of support that have poured in from across the region and beyond.
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045478
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
People of conscience and goodwill everywhere must stand together in these difficult days against
violence, hate, and division.
I am enormously proud of the men and women who risk their lives every day in the service of
our country and our values. They help make the United States the greatest force for peace,
progress, and human dignity that the world has ever known, We honor the memory of our fallen
colleagues by continuing their work and carrying on the best traditions of a bold and generous
nation.
Remarks at the Opening Plenary of the U.S.-Morocco Strategic Dialogue
September 13, 2012
SECRETARY CLINTON: Good morning. Well, let me welcome our friends and colleagues
from Morocco here to the Benjamin Franklin Room on the eighth floor of the State Department
for this very important first session of the U.S.-Morocco Strategic Dialogue. Before I begin to
address the significance of this Strategic Dialogue and the next step in our long relations with
Morocco, I want to say a few words about the events unfolding in the world today.
We are closely watching what is happening in Yemen and elsewhere, and we certainly hope and
expect that there will be steps taken to avoid violence and prevent the escalation of protests into
violence.
I also want to take a moment to address the video circulating on the Internet that has led to these
protests in a number of countries. Let me state very clearly — and I hope it is obvious — that the
United States Government had absolutely nothing to do with this video. We absolutely reject its
content and message. America's commitment to religious tolerance goes back to the very
beginning of our nation. And as you know, we are home to people of all religions, many of
whom came to this country seeking the right to exercise their own religion, including, of course,
millions of Muslims. And we have the greatest respect for people of faith.
To us, to me personally, this video is disgusting and reprehensible. It appears to have a deeply
cynical purpose: to denigrate a great religion and to provoke rage. But as I said yesterday, there
is no justification, none at all, for responding to this video with violence, We condemn the
violence that has resulted in the strongest terms, and we greatly appreciate that many Muslims in
the United States and around the world have spoken out on this issue.
Violence, we believe, has no place in religion and is no way to honor religion. Islam, like other
religions, respects the fundamental dignity of human beings, and it is a violation of that
fundamental dignity to wage attacks on innocents. As long as there are those who are willing to
shed blood and take innocent life in the name of religion, the name of God, the world will never
know a true and lasting peace. It is especially wrong for violence to be directed against
diplomatic missions. These are places whose very purpose is peaceful: to promote better
understuiding across countries and cultures. All governments have a responsibility to protect
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045479
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
those spaces and people, because to attack an embassy is to attack the idea that we can work
together to build understanding and a better future.
Now, I know it is hard for some people to understand why the United States cannot or does not
just prevent these kinds of reprehensible videos from ever seeing the light of day. Now, I would
note that in today's world with today's technologies, that is impossible. But even if it were
possible, our country does have a long tradition of free expression which is enshrined in our
Constitution and our law, and we do not stop individual citizens from expressing their views no
matter how distasteful they may be.
There are, of course, different views around the world about the outer limits of free speech and
free expression, but there should be no debate about the simple proposition that violence in
response to speech is not acceptable. We all — whether we are leaders in government, leaders in
civil society or religious leaders — must draw the line at violence. And any responsible leader
should be standing up now and drawing that line.
I wanted to begin with this statement, because, as our Moroccan friends and all of you know, this
has been a difficult week at the State Department. I very much appreciate, Minister, the
condolences your government expressed to our Embassy in Rabat And even though that tragedy
happened far away in Benghazi, we found a reminder of the deep bounds that connect Morocco
to the United States. It was in the High Atlas Mountains of Morocco that one of the Americans
we lost this week, Ambassador Chris Stevens, fell in love with the region when he served as a
Peace Corps volunteer there. That experience set him on a decades-long career of service. So in
the memory of fallen friends and colleagues, let us remind ourselves of the many ways in which
riot just our governments but the people of our two nations have worked together to build a better
future.
In many ways, the United States looks to Morocco to be a leader and a model. His Majesty King
Mohammed deserves great credit for the work you've undertaken. In fact, after my visit to Rabat
earlier this year. I told my team: ""We need to start a Strategic Dialogue with Morocco."" No
country has been a friend of the United States longer than Morocco. You were the first nation to
recognize us back in 1777. But we're not satisfied with simply having a friendship that is
longstanding We want one that is dynamic, growing, looking toward the future. So let me
highlight a few of the areas we should focus on today.
On political reform, we have all seen remarkable changes taking place across North Africa and
the Middle East. I commend Morocco and your government for your efforts to stay ahead of
these changes by holding free and fair elections, empowering the elected parliament, taking other
steps to ensure that the government reflects the will of the people. Today, our political working
group will discuss how the United States can continue to support your efforts to translate
commitments into actions. Because as we all know, democracy, real reform, require that people
themselves feel the changes in their evetyday lives: the courts reformed, the government more
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045480
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
open and transparent, universal human rights of all Moroccans — men and women alike —
respected.
I'm especially pleased by Morocco's commitments to take on the deeply troubling problem of
child marriage. We know that child brides are less likely to get an education, more likely to face
life-threatening problems, particularly around child birth and delivery, which not only
shortchanges them but can even rob them and their communities of their lives and talents. So we
want to encourage the government and civil society to continue their important work together on
this issue.
With regard to the Western Sahara, the United States continues to support efforts to find a
peaceful, sustainable, mutually agreed-upon solution. U.S. policy toward the Western Sahara has
remained consistent for many years. We have made clear that Morocco's autonomy plan is
serious, realistic, and credible, and that it represents a potential approach that could satisfy the
aspirations of the people in the Western Sahara to run their own affairs in peace and dignity. We
continue to support the negotiations carried out by the United Nations and hope parties can work
toward resolution.
With respect to the economy, our second working group will focus on what more can be done to
deliver tangible economic benefits. Morocco's economy is relatively healthy, but you face the
same problem that is now endemic across the world — unemployment is still too high, especially
among young people.
That's why the United States is providing $1.5 million to support an effort to attract foreign
investors, foster local economic development, and combat corruption across the region. And I'm
pleased to announce that later this year we will hold a Morocco business development
conference here in Washington to connect businesses from both countries.
Today, we should discuss ways to build on all of these efforts by increasing bilateral trade, a
particular goal of mine since so much trade from Morocco goes to Europe. I'd like to increase
the amount of trade coming to the United States, and also to improve economic integration
across North Africa, which could greatly benefit Morocco because of Morocco's stability and
Morocco's very strong economic foundation. The greater integration there is, the greater the
benefits for Moroccans.
Third, the attack in Benghazi this week reminds us that security remains a vital issue. Through
our work together on the Global Counterterrorism Task Force, the United States and Morocco
already share crucial information and best practices, and I thank Morocco for hosting a Global
Counterterrorism Task Force workshop on threats in the South Atlantic next month.
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045481
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
We are also collaborating through USAID, the Peace Corps, and other agencies to help provide
Moroccan youth with alternatives to criminal and extremist organizations. And so we are
partnering to help strengthen Morocco's criminal justice system and law enforcement.
There will be a lot to discuss in the meeting today. And let me add, the United States greatly
appreciates the constructive role Morocco is playing on the UN Security Council, especially your
support for the effort to end the violence and bloodshed in Syria and help to usher in a new
democratic future for that country. I commend Morocco for offering to host the next ministerial
meeting of the Friends of the Syrian People, and we look forward to continuing to work closely
together as close partners even after your term on the Security Council has ended.
Finally, our education and cultural ties are reason for much celebration. This year marks the 30th
anniversary of our official program to facilitate academic exchanges and other bonds between us.
There are more than 5,000 Moroccan alumni of these programs. Two are with us today — Dr.
Benjelloun and Dr. Ouaouicha — and we thank them. But among all our work on this front, from
preserving Morocco's historic sites to empowering youth, there's one area I particularly hope we
can focus on today and receive your advice and counsel — namely, interfaith dialogue.
In these tense and turbulent times, it's more important than ever for people of different faiths to
exchange ideas, to build understanding, to promote religious tolerance. It's one of the great
challenges of the 21st century, and it's one that we must address together.
So we have a lot of work to do, Minister, but our friendship runs long and deep, and as the treaty
our nations signed in 1786 says, and I quote, ""Trusting in God, it will remain permanent."" I'm
confident that we will continue to solve problems and produce results that make our nations
stronger, more peaceful, more secure, more prosperous, and also contribute to doing the same for
the world.
So again, let me welcome you, Minister. It's been a great pleasure for me to get to know you, to
work with you, to be your colleague bilaterally, regionally, and globally, and also welcome your
distinguished delegation.
Thank you. (Applause.)
Remarks at Reception Ntlarking Eid ul-Fitr
September 13, 2012
SECRETARY CLINTON: Good evening, and although I am many weeks overdue in saying it:
Eid Mubarak. No matter how belated we are honoring Eid and the end of Ramadan, this is a
cherished tradition here at the State Department. And I would like to thank all of you for being
here, including the many members of the Diplomatic Corps.
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045482
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
Tonight, our gathering is more somber than any of us would like. This comes during sad and
difficult days for the State Department family. We lost four Americans. They were good and
brave men. They were committed to the cause of building a brighter future for the people of
Libya. And we condemn the violence in the strongest terms, the violence against our posts in
Benghazi, in Egypt, and now in Yemen.
The Libyan ambassador is with us tonight, and I want to take a moment to thank him for the
support that his government and the Libyan people have shown to the United States in this
tragedy, particularly the outpouring of feelings of grief and loss because of the killing of our
ambassador.
Ambassador Aujali, would you mind saying a few words?
AMBASSADOR AMU: [redacted]
SECRETARY CLINTON: Thank you very much, Ambassador. I know that that was a very
personal loss for you, as it was for me. I'm the one who sent Chris to Benghazi during the
revolution to show support and be able to advise our government about what we could do to
bring freedom and democracy and opportunity to the people of Libya.
Religious freedom and religious tolerance are essential to the stability of any nation, any people.
Hatred and violence in the name of religion only poison the well. All people of faith and good
will know that the actions of a small and savage group in Benghazi do not honor religion or God
in any way. Nor do they speak for the more than one billion Muslims around the world, many of
whom have shown an outpouring of support during this time
Unfortunately, however, over the last 24 hours, we have also seen violence spread elsewhere.
Some seek to justify this behavior as a response to inflammatory, despicable material posted on
the intemet. As I said earlier today, the United States rejects both the content and the message of
that video. The United States deplores any intentional effort to denigrate the religious beliefs of
others. At our meeting earlier today, my colleague, the foreign minister of Morocco, said that all
prophets should be respected because they are all symbols of our humanity, for all humanity.
But both of us were crystal clear in this paramount message: There is never any justification for
violent acts of this kind. And we look to leaders around the world to stand up and speak out
against violence, and to take steps to protect diplomatic missions from attack.
Think about it. When Christians are subject to insults to their faith, and that certainly happens,
we expect them not to resort to violence. When Hindus or Buddhists are subjected to insults to
their faiths, and that also certainly happens, we expect them not to resort to violence. The same
goes for all faiths, including Islam.
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045483
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
When all of us who are people of faith - and I am one — feel the pain of insults, of
misunderstanding, of denigration to what we cherish, we must expect ourselves and others not to
resort to violence, That is a universal standard and expectation, and it is everyone's obligation to
meet that, so that we make no differences, we expect no less of ourselves than we expect of
others, You cannot respond to offensive speech with violence without begetting more violence.
And I so strongly believe that the great religions of the world are stronger than any insults. They
have withstood offense for centuries. Refraining from violence, then, is not a sign of weakness in
one's faith; it is absolutely the opposite, a sign that one's faith is unshakable.
So tonight, we must come together and recommit ourselves to working toward a future marked
by understanding and acceptance rather than distrust, hatred, and fear. We can pledge that
whenever one person speaks out in ignorance and bigotry, ten voices will answer. They will
answer resoundingly against the offense and the insult, answering ignorance with enlightenment,
answering hatred with understanding, answering darkness with light; that if one person commits
a violent act in the name of religion, millions will stand up and condemn it out of strength.
In times like these, it can be easy to despair that some differences are irreconcilable, some
mountains too steep to climb; we will therefore never reach the level of understanding and
peacefulness that we seek, and which I believe the great religions of the world call us to pursue.
But that's not what I believe, and I don't think it's what you believe either here tonight. Part of
what makes our country so special is we keep trying. We keep working. We keep investing in
our future. We keep supporting the next generation, believing that young people can keep us
moving forward in a positive direction.
So tonight I think it's important that we talk not just about that better tomorrow that we all seek,
but also about some of the things — the real, practical, tangible things — that young people are
doing to help shape that better future.
Two years ago in this room, at our Eid reception, we launched a program called Generation
Change to lead a grassroots agenda of positive engagement with Muslim communities. And I
asked the young Muslim leaders in the audience that night to be our unofficial ambassadors, to
help build personal connections, seek out partners in other countries. And I can report to you
tonight they did not disappoint. In a few minutes, you're going to meet some of these young
leaders, each with a powerful story to tell.
The Generation Change network that started in this room now circles the globe. We are building
an international alliance of young people who want to drive change in their own communities.
They act as mentors, spark respectful debates, simply offer words of encouragement when
needed. But most importantly, they inspire others to keep expanding the circle of mutual
understanding and respect, one person at a time.
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045484
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
Even as we work to spread tolerance more broadly, we also are working to deepen our
appreciation for the experiences of others. Our 2012 Hours Against Hate initiative encourages
young people to put themselves in another person's shoes through service projects. So far, young
people from all over the world have pledged thousands of volunteer hours to help people from a
different background, to see them as a fellow human being, not a stereotype, not a caricature, but
another real live person — people who don't look like you, live like you, pray like you, but with
whom we will share this planet. And therefore, we have work to do.
People of faith and conscience are called to be the leaders of tolerance. In my tradition, like all
traditions, we are expected to love one another. And together, we have to translate that into better
understanding and cooperation. I'm particularly pleased that the young people you will hear from
tonight are really setting an example, not only for young people elsewhere in the world but,
frankly, for us who are older as well.
Let me now call to the stage someone who has been a tremendous assistance to me in these
efforts. Farah Pandith is the Department's first Special Representative to Muslim Communities.
And from the beginning, she has made reaching out to young people and civil society her top
priority. Farah will introduce you to three young leaders who I am very proud of
Remarks at the Transfer of Remains Ceremony to Honor Those Lost in Attacks in Benghazi, Libya
September 14, 2012
SECRETARY CLINTON: Thank you very much, Chaplain. Mr. President, Mr. Vice President,
Secretary Panetta, Ambassador Rice, Secretary Powell and Mrs. Powell, family members of the
four patriots and heroes we bring home, members of the State Department family, ladies and
gentlemen, today we bring home four Americans who gave their lives for our country and our
values. To the families of our fallen colleagues, I offer our most heartfelt condolences and
deepest gratitude.
Sean Smith joined the State Department after six years in the Air Force. He was respected as an
expert on technology by colleagues in Pretoria, Baghdad, Montreal, and The Hague. He enrolled
in correspondence courses at Penn State and had high hopes for the future. Sean leaves behind a
loving wife Heather, two young children, Samantha and Nathan, and scores of grieving family,
friends, and colleagues. And that's just in this world. Because online in the virtual worlds that
Sean helped create, he is also being mourned by countless competitors, collaborators, and garners
who shared his passion.
Tyrone Woods, known to most as Rone, spent two decades as a Navy SEAL, serving multiple
tours in Iraq and Afghanistan. Since 2010, he protected American diplomatic personnel in
dangerous posts from Central America to the Middle East. He had the hands of a healer as well
as the arms of a warrior, earning distinction as a registered nurse and certified paramedic. Our
hearts go out to Tyrone's wife Dorothy, and his three sons Tyrone, Jr., Hunter, and Kai, born just
a few months ago, along with his grieving faii)ily, friends, and colleagues.
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045485
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
Glen Doherty, who went by Bub, was also a former SEAL and an experienced paramedic. He too
died as he lived, serving his country and protecting his colleagues. Glen deployed to some of the
most dangerous places on Earth, including Iraq and Afghanistan, always putting his life on the
line to safeguard other Americans. Our thoughts and prayers are with Glen's father Bernard, his
mother Barbara, his brother Gregory, his sister Kathleen, and their grieving families, friends, and
colleagues.
I was honored to know Ambassador Chris Stevens. I want to thank his parents and siblings, who
are here today, for sharing Chris with us and with our country. What a wonderful gift you gave
us. Over his distinguished career in the Foreign Service, Chris won friends for the United States
in far-flung places. He made those people's hopes his own. During the revolution in Libya, he
risked his life to help protect the Libyan people from a tyrant, and he gave his life helping them
build a better country.
People loved to work with Chris. And as he rose through the ranks, they loved to work for Chris.
He was known not only for his courage but for his smile — goofy but contagious — for his sense
of fun and that California cool.
In the days since the attack, so many Libyans — including the Ambassador from Libya to the
United States, who is with us today — have expressed their sorrow and solidarity. One young
woman, her head covered and her eyes haunted with sadness, held up a handwritten sign that said
""Thugs and killers don't represent Benghazi nor Islam,"" The President of the Palestinian
Authority, who worked closely with Chris when he served in Jerusalem, sent me a letter
remembering his energy and integrity, and deploring — and I quote — ""an act of ugly terror.""
Many others from across the Middle East and North Africa have offered similar sentiments.
This has been a difficult week for the State Department and for our country. We've seen the
heavy assault on our post in Benghazi that took the lives of those brave men. We've seen rage
and violence directed at American embassies over an awful interne video that we had nothing to
do with. It is hard for the American people to make sense of that because it is senseless, and it is
totally unacceptable.
The people of Egypt, Libya, Yemen, and Tunisia did not trade the tyranny of a dictator for the
tyranny of a mob. Reasonable people and responsible leaders in these countries need to do
everything they can to restore security and hold accountable those behind these violent acts. And
we will, under the President's leadership, keep taking steps to protect our personnel around the
world.
There will be more difficult days ahead, but it is important that we don't lose sight of the
fundamental fact that America must keep leading the world. We owe it to those four men to
continue the long, hard work of diplomacy. I am enormously proud of the men and women of the
State Department. I'm proud of all those across our government, civilian and military alike, who
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045486
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
represent America abroad. They help make the United States the greatest force for peace,
progress, and human dignity the world has ever known. If the last few days teach us anything, let
it be this: That this work and the men and women who risk their lives to do it are at the heart of
what makes America great and good.
So we will wipe away our tears, stiffen our spines, and face the future undaunted. And we will
do it together, protecting and helping one another, just like Sean, Tyrone, Glen, and Chris always
did. May God bless them and grant their families peace and solace, and may God continue to
bless the United States of America.
And now, let me have the great honor of introducing someone who came to the State Department
earlier this week to grieve with us. He well understands and values the work that these men were
doing for our country. The President of the United States.
Remarks With Mexican Secretary of Foreign Relations Patricia Espinosa After Their
Meeting
September 18, 2012
SECRETARY CLINTON: Good afternoon, everyone. And it is such a pleasure for me to
welcome my friend and colleague, Secretary Espinosa, along with a very distinguished
delegation of officials from the Mexican Government for this continuation of consultation at the
highest levels of each of our governments.
Before I turn to the matters discussed today, let me give a brief update on the ongoing U.S.
response to the protests in the Middle East and elsewhere. I'm sure as you know already, we are
taking aggressive steps to protect our staffs in embassies and consulates worldwide. That
includes reviewing our security posture at every post and augmenting it where necessary. And
we are working closely with the Libyan Government in our efforts to bring to justice those who
murdered our four American colleagues in Benghazi.
The FBI is now in Tripoli to join the investigation with Libyan officials, and there is nothing
more important to us than ensuring the safety of our American representatives worldwide. At the
same time, as I have said to State Department employees, the incidents of the past week highlight
how important our work is. The United States must and will remain strongly engaged in the
world. Our men and women risk their lives in service to our country and our values, because they
know that the United States must be a force for peace and progress. That is worth striving and
sacrificing for, and nothing that happened last week changes this fundamental fact.
Now, turning to our friends and partners in Mexico, we are always pleased to have a chance to
discuss matters of mutual interest and concern between us. Mexico is one of our closest friends
as well as partner on dozens of critical issues. So we talk about every kind of issue you can
imagine, from education and healthcare to poverty alleviation to the environment. But today, we
focused on a top priority for us both a security.
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045487
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
We just co-chaired the fourth meeting of the U.S.-Mexico Merida High-Level Consultative
Group. This is the last one we will hold during the Calderon Administration. And I want to offer
my personal appreciation to President Calderon and to Foreign Secretary Espinosa for their
leadership and commitment to this partnership and to all on both sides of the border in our
governments who have been deeply engaged and committed to it. The Merida Initiative
represents an unprecedented level of security cooperation between Mexico and the United States.
As our countries continue to deal with the serious challenge of transnational criminal
organizations, including drug traffickers, illegal arms traffickers, money launderers, and violent
gangs that threaten people on both sides of the border, we well know there is no quick and easy
way to stop these criminals and bring them to justice. But nevertheless, during the past now
nearly four years, our countries have collaborated to an extraordinary and unprecedented degree.
We have brought together policy makers and experts from across our governments and societies
who have worked hand in hand to keep our people safe. And I think the habits of cooperation we
have built are among our most important achievements, and we will rely on them for a long time
to come.
Today, our delegations reviewed the gains we've made on key priorities, including improving
law enforcement coordination, reducing the demand for drugs, modernizing our border
infrastructure, strengthening the rule of law, and building more resilient and empowered
communities. We also discussed the lessons we've learned and the work that lies ahead in these
and other areas, which our joint statement will reflect. I want to underscore how important our
security relationship with Mexico is to the United States.
The Government of Mexico and the Mexican people have faced the threat posed by these
criminals with courage and resolve, and we remain committed to doing everything we can to
support Mexico as it continues to work to bring those criminals to justice. This is a transnational
problem, and it calls for a transnational solution, and the United States believes this is a matter of
shared responsibility. That was the first message I brought as Secretary of State when I came to
Mexico, and it continues to be the hallmark of our efforts together. Making sure our people are
safe and our neighbors are safe is of the utmost importance to us.
Now, our two countries share many other priorities, and one of them, empowering women and
girls, was also addressed today. We took the opportunity, the Foreign Secretary and I, to sign a
Memorandum of Understanding between our countries to work together to advance gender
equality, empower girls and women, promote their human rights, and enhance their security.
So again, Secretary Espinosa, let me thank you for years of work and effort, for our productive
conversations in many places around the world and again today, and for being such a valuable
colleague and partner. The United States deeply, deeply values our relationship with Mexico and
the ties of family and friendship that connect so many millions of our people.
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045488
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
And we look forward to the future. We believe strongly that presidential administrations may
change, elections will come and go, but we have established a firm foundation for cooperation
that has already benefited both our countries and which will continue to benefit both of our
countries for many years ahead. So thank you very much.
MS. NULAND: We'll take (inaudible). Margaret Brennan, CBS News.
QUESTION: Madam Secretary, thanks for your time. Are you any closer to finding who killed
Ambassador Chris Stevens?, Libya's President says this attack was planned for months. Are you
confident he's wrong and that security measures were appropriate? And will you leave justice to
the Libyans?
SECRETARY CLINTON: As I said at the outset, we are taking aggressive steps to protect our
people and our consulates and embassies around the world. We are reviewing our security
posture at every post and working with host governments to be sure they know what our security-
needs are wherever necessary. We are also working closely with the Libyan Government to bring
the perpetrators to justice so that we can be assured that we have found who murdered our four,
colleagues and under what circumstances. As I said, the FBI has joined the investigation inside
Libya, and we will not rest until the people who orchestrated this attack are found and punished.
It is also important to look at this strategically and understand what is going on across the region.
In a number of places where protests have tuned violent, we are seeing the hand of extremists
who are trying to exploit people's inflamed passions for their own agendas. But overwhelmingly,
we have found that the people of Egypt, of Libya, of Yemen and Tunisia are not prepared to
trade the tyranny of a dictator for the tyranny of a mob. They want to turn their attention to the
future to provide better opportunities for themselves and their children, and they want a strong
partnership with the United States and the American people based on mutual interests and mutual
respect.
This is part of a larger debate that is going on inside these societies. In Libya, for example, in
their first free elections, moderates were successful at the polls. But look, there are extremists in
all of these societies and on the outside who are working to take advantage of broad outrage in
order to incite violence and specifically incite violence against Americans and American
facilities.
And as I have said to many of the leaders I have spoken to over the past week, these extremist
efforts are a threat to the people of the societies and the governments of those societies as well as
to the region and the United States. And I think it's important at this moment for leaders to put
themselves on the right side of this debate - to speak out clearly and unequivocally against
violence, whoever incites it or conducts it
And in a struggle like this, there can be no doubt where the United States must stand. We support
those who are fighting for the same values and rights that we believe in - in democracy, in
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045489
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
freedom, in universal rights for men and women, for justice and accountability. And I want to
underscore that the United States will continue to work with partners and allies in the region and
around the world to help bring security to these nations so that the promise of the revolutions that
they experienced can be realized.
And finally, on your specific point about Benghazi, we obviously never talk publicly about
security at any of our missions for obvious reasons. But that said, let me assure you that our
security in Benghazi included a unit of host government security forces, as well as a local guard
force of the kind that we rely on in many places around the world. In addition to the security
outside the compound, we relied on a wall and a robust security presence inside the compound.
And with all of our missions overseas, in advance of September lid', as is done every year, we
did an evaluation on threat streams. And the Office of the Director of National Intelligence has
said we had no actionable intelligence that an attack on our post in Benghazi was planned or
imminent.
But let me state the obvious again. Our diplomats engage in dangerous work, and it's the nature
of diplomacy in fragile societies and conflict zones to be aware of the necessity for security but
to also continue the important diplomatic work that has to go on. There is risk inherent in what
we do and what these brave men and women representing the United States are up against every
single day, and we do our very best to limit that risk by ensuring that our security protocols
reflect the environments in which diplomats work and the threats that they are presented with.
Thank you.
Remarks With Indonesian Foreign Minister Raden Mohammad Marty Muliana
Natalegawa After Their Meeting
September 20, 2012
SECRETARY CLINTON: Good afternoon, everyone. And it's such a pleasure, as always, to
welcome the Indonesian Foreign Minister, and I believe the largest delegation that has ever come
from Indonesia, for the purpose of our third meeting of the U.S.-Indonesia Joint Commission.
This commission is the result of a vision by our two presidents for a comprehensive partnership,
and the agreement to that effect was signed in 2010. Thanks to this partnership, the United States
and Indonesia are working more closely than ever on a range of issues from global security to
clean energy and climate to regional trade and commerce.
And today, Marty and I had the chance to take stock of where our teams have come in the time
of the last year, because we liad our meeting in Bali a year ago. And I must say, I was very
impressed. We covered a great deal today.
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045490
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
But before I start, I'd like to say a few words about the protests in several countries around the
world. We have condemned in the strongest possible terms the violence that has erupted from
these protests. And as I have said, the video that sparked these protests is disgusting and
reprehensible, and the United States Government, of course, had absolutely nothing to do with it.
But there is no justification for violence, and I want to thank the Foreign Minister and his
government for speaking out against violence. We have to look to reasonable people and
responsible leaders everywhere to stand up to extremists who would seek to take advantage of
this moment to commit violent acts against embassies and their fellow countrymen.
Today's meetings have highlighted the strong foundation that we have built together. And one of
our most important concerns is promoting peace and stability in the Asia Pacific. Today, I'm
announcing that the Obama Administration has informed Congress of the potential sale of eight
AH-64D Apache Longbow helicopters to the Indonesian Government. This agreement will
strengthen our comprehensive partnership and help enhance security across the region.
On growth and prosperity, we are increasing our trade relationship that topped $26 billion last
year. Investments in transportation, energy, and infrastructure are creating jobs and supporting
economic growth in both countries. For example, the deal between Lion Air and Boeing alone
represents $21 billion in trade over the next decade. Indonesia's Government has announced half
a trillion dollars in infrastructure improvements, and we recently signed a memorandum of
understanding to make it easier for American companies to bid on these projects.
And yesterday, we signed an agreement for implementing our Millennium Challenge
Corporation Compact with Indonesia. Over the next five years, the United States will invest $600
million in clean energy development, child health and nutrition programs, and efforts to help
make Indonesia's Government more transparent and open.
The United States is also looking forward to Indonesia hosting APEC in 2013, and we are
confident that Indonesia will come to this role with a commitment to promote greater economic
integration across the Asia Pacific.
Both the Foreign Minister and I believe that strong education is essential to compete in a modem
global economy. That's why the United States has expanded the Fulbright Program and
supported partnerships between dozens of American and Indonesian universities. Academic
exchanges between our countries are up and applications from Indonesian students to visit the
United States have increased by one third. USAID has recently expanded its basic education
program to provide $83 million for teacher training and literacy programs for young children.
And we're providing $20 in scholarship funding for Indonesian graduate students.
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045491
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
I also thanked the Minister for Indonesia's leadership in ASEAN. The Foreign Minister's
personal leadership has helped lay the groundwork for diplomacy between ASEAN and China as
it relates to the South China Sea. And we continue to support ASEAN's six-point principles,
which we believe will help reduce tensions and pave the way for a comprehensive code of
conduct for addressing disputes without threats, coercion, or use of force.
Finally. Indonesia and the United States have stood together on a range of global challenges,
from democratic reform in Burma to combating climate change, to working to end the violence
in Syria. We are also coordinating efforts to further develop south-south and triangular
cooperation, such as enhancing disaster preparedness in Burma and convening a conference on
women's empowerment.
We believe that as the second and third-largest democracies in the world, the United States and
Indonesia have a special responsibility to promote democracy and human rights. And for the last
four years, Indonesia has hosted the Bali Democracy Forum to promote peaceful, democratic
transitions through example and open dialogue. Last year, more than 80 countries attended. And
once again, the United States will be sending a high-level delegation.
So, Minister, thank you for everything. Thank you for the great partnership we've had between
us and between our countries.
MS. NULAND: We'll take two questions today, we'll start with Ros Jordan of Al Jazeera
English.
QUESTION: Thank you, Madam Secretary, Mr. Foreign Minister. Madam Secretary, my
question is about the ongoing investigation into last week's attack at the consulate in Benghazi.
You are meeting this afternoon with members of Congress to discuss the progress and the
concerns that they understandably have. First, there is the federal mandate to establish an
accountability review board. Have you done so? Who would you like to see chair it? Are there
certain questions that you desperately want to have answered in order to safeguard the safety of
Foreign Service Officers around the world?
And related to this, given the political instability and the successes of the past year and a half, are
you satisfied that in light of those political changes, enough was done to protect those working in
the Middle East and North Africa? And then finally — and this is perhaps going into the area of
rumor and speculation — but there is at least one report suggesting that Ambassador Stevens felt
that he was on a, quote, ""al-Qaida hit list"" Is this a scurrilous rumor? Is this gallows humor
when one is working in a period of difficulty and great challenge, or is there something more to
what he allegedly — and I stress that word — said?
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045492
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
SECRETARY CLINTON: Well, first, let me say I'm looking forward to the opportunity to go
up to the Congress today. I will be briefing in two separate sessions, the House and the Senate, in
a classified setting, along with my interagency colleagues, as we continue to work together, and
with governments around the world, to ensure that our people and our facilities are safe. I will be
joined today by the Director of National Intelligence, General Clapper, by the Deputy Secretary
of Defense, Ash Carter, by the Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Sandy Winnefeld,
along with experts from the FBI, the State Department, and elsewhere in the government.
Now, I anticipate that this briefing will cover our security posture before and during the events,
and the steps we have taken since to do everything we can with host governments to protect our
people and our embassies and consulates. The Director of National Intelligence will speak to the
intelligence issues surrounding these events in Libya. Deputy Secretary Carter will brief on the
superb support we have had from the U.S. military in the wake of these events, and we are at the
very early stages of an FBI investigation. The team from the FBI reached Libya earlier this week.
And I will advise Congress also that I am launching an accountability review board that will be
chaired by Ambassador Thomas Pickering.
I will also talk about the importance of the broader relationships with these countries in light of
the events of the past days. There are obviously very real challenges in these new democracies,
these fragile societies, but as I said last week, the vast majority of the people in these countries
did not throw off the tyranny of a dictator to trade it for the tyranny of a mob. And we are
concerned first and foremost with our own people and facilities, but we are concerned about the
internal security in these countries because ultimately, that puts at risk the men, women, and
children of these societies on a daily ongoing basis if actions are not taken to try to restore
security and civil order.
And let me just conclude by saying that there can be no doubt where the United States stands.
We continue to support those who are fighting for universal values — values that we see at work
in Indonesia — the third largest democracy in the world. We believe that these values of universal
rights, of justice and accountability, of democracy, are there for every person regardless of where
that person might live. So I will look forward to having a chance to talk with members of
Congress.
As to your final question, I have absolutely no information or reason to believe that there's any
basis for that.
QUESTION: Thank you.
MS. NULAND: Last question. Victoria Sidjabat from Tempo Magazine, please.
QUESTION: Yes. Madam, thank you. My question is: Starting today, U.S. Embassy and
Consulate are closed in Indonesia as the Muslim movie become wild fireball, which could be
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045493
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
designed as a weapon to attack U.S. by raising sentiment anti-U.S. from the countries which has
Muslim majority population like Indonesia.
Madam Clinton, how do you see this threat as on the long run? If it's continuing happen, it's —
obviously could give impact to the implementation of (inaudible) program in Indonesia. What is
the reason U.S. Government closed the Embassy and Consulate in Indonesia? What is your
expectation from Indonesia Government, for my Minister Marty Natalegawa? How Indonesia
Government respond to the closing of this Embassy and Consulate, it's starting today? Is U.S. —
Indonesia Government has capability to protect U.S. Embassy and Consulate. So the (inaudible)
program implemented — could be implemented successfully in Indonesia. Thank you.
SECRETARY CLINTON: Well, let me begin by saying how grateful we are for the excellent
cooperation we have received from the Government of Indonesia, and in particular, from the law
enforcement and security institutions in Indonesia. We are very grateful for not only the
cooperation and protection that has been provided to our facilities, but also to the strong
statements condemning violence from the President, the Foreign Mihister, and others.
In consultation with the Government of Indonesia, we have temporarily, for tomorrow, closed
our facilities. We want to be sure that law enforcement in Indonesia has the ability to do what it
needs to do to make sure that there is no disruption of civil order and security. So we are
cooperating completely, and we're very grateful for the strong leadership provided by Indonesia.
FOREIGN MINISTER NATALEGAWA: Hello, (inaudible), if I may just also respond.
Precisely as the Secretary had said, the decision by the United States Government to close
temporarily its embassies and consulates tomorrow in Indonesia is a decision that's been made
based on communication and conversation between the authorities in Indonesia and the United
States as well. So in other words, it is an informed decision, a decision that is not intended to
show any unfriendly intent on the part of anyone, but it is what it is, and it's quite some — it's the
kind of step that governments actually carry out when situations requires it, even in our case.
Some of our embassies abroad, when the situation requires us to have a temporary closing of the
embassy, we do that as well. So it is something that is quite regular and something that is
actually coordinated as well.
But if I may just broaden the subject matter, I think as our President had said in the past,
Indonesian Government the Indonesian people, even, obviously cannot and would not condone
the — any acts of violence against diplomatic premises, against diplomatic personnel, because
that is, truly — would be a challenge to the efficient and a proper conduct of relations among
states. So that's our point of departure.
At the same time, of course, beyond the immediate issue of protection of the embassies, we have
still ahead of us the challenge of how to prevent the kind of situations where we are now at in
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045494
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
terms of the kind of incendiary and the kind of statements or, in this instance, films that cause —
that is now we have all deplored and condemned for these kind of activities not to be repeated.
So we have a lot of homework to work towards in the future as well.
SECRETARY CLINTON: Thank you all very much.
FOREIGN MINISTER NATALEGAWA: Thank you.
Remarks With Pakistani Foreign Minister Hina Rabbani Khar Before Their Meeting
September 21, 2012
Good afternoon, and let me begin by welcoming Foreign Minister Khar on her first visit to
Washington as foreign minister. We've had the opportunity to meet in Islamabad and other
settings, but I am very pleased that we would have this chance to exchange views on our bilateral
relationship as well as regional and global issues.
I want to begin by addressing the events of the day and the past week. Today, we've once again
seen protests in several cities in Pakistan. Unfortunately, some of those protests have turned
violent and, sadly, resulted in loss of life. I want to thank the Government of Pakistan for their
efforts to protect our Embassy in Islamabad and consulates in Lahore, Peshawar, and Karachi.
And I want to be clear, as I have said on numerous occasions, the violence we have seen cannot
be tolerated. There is no justification for violence. Of course, there is provocation, and we have
certainly made clear that we do not in any way support provocation. We found the video that's at
the core of this series of events offensive, disgusting, reprehensible.
But that does not provide justification for violence, and therefore it is important for responsible
leaders, indeed responsible people everywhere, to stand up and speak out against violence and
particularly against those who would exploit this difficult moment to advance their own
extremist ideologies.
Yesterday afternoon when I briefed the Congress, I made it clear that keeping our people
everywhere in the world safe is our top priority. What happened in Benghazi was a terrorist
attack, and we will not rest until we have tracked down and brought to justice the terrorists who
murdered four Americans. And we are taking aggressive measures at all of our posts to protect
our staffs and their families along with locally employed people who provide so many important
contributions to the work of our missions.
The Foreign Minister and I will have a chance to cover a full range of subjects today, and it is no
secret that the past year and a half has been challenging for Pakistan and the United States. And
we still have work to do to get our bilateral relationship to the point where we would like it to be,
but we both recognize that we can achieve more when we work together on a focused agenda. So
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045495
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
today is the latest in a series of high-level meetings. Ambassador Marc Grossman has just
returned from consultations in Islamabad. I look forward to seeing President Zardari next week
at the UN General Assembly. At each meeting, we are working to identify the strategic goals we
share — and there are many — and the concrete actions we can each take to accomplish them.
Our number one shared priority remains pursuing our joint counterterrorism objectives to ensure
the security of American and Pakistani citizens alike. We face a common threat from a common
enemy, and we must confront terrorism and extremism together. Earlier this month, I designated
the Haqqani Network as a Foreign Terrorist Organization so we could make full use of every
available legal authority to end their deadly attacks. Pakistan's parliament has called for
expelling foreign fighters so that Pakistan's territory can be fully under control of the Pakistani
Government and cannot be used to launch attacks against other nations.
And the follow-through on this is challenging but necessary, and we look forward to working
with Pakistan as they continue to address these problems. We have both pledged to support a
secure, stable, and prosperous Afghanistan, which is vital for the security of the region. And I
want to thank Foreign Minister Khar for Pakistan's reopening of the NATO supply lines to allow
the movement of goods to Afghanistan.
We will discuss the successful first meeting of the Safe Passage Working Group in Islamabad
which brought together Afghan, Pakistani, and U.S. representatives to advance the peace process
in Afghanistan. The Pakistani Government's public call for insurgents to come forward and talk
with the Afghan Government was particularly important. We are ready to work together to build
on these steps, and we will continue our discussions through bilateral consultations and the U.S.-
Afghanistan-Pakistan Core Group.
Now, of course, our relationship goes far beyond our shared security concerns, and today we will
discuss the many other ways in which we work together, particularly to create economic
opportunity for Pakistanis. Foreign Minister Khar and I agree that we need to shift our economic
relationship from aid to trade and investment. We are working to help Pakistan attract more
private sector investment. We hope to finalize a bilateral investment treaty soon. And we've
created a Pakistan private investment initiative to help more of Pakistan's small and medium
sized companies get access to capital.
Over the past few years, we have seen Pakistan's civilian government begin to put down stronger
roots. And if elections proceed as planned next year, it will mark the first time in Pakistan's
history that a civilian-led government has served its full term. The United States supports
Pakistan's economic development, and we have said many times that we want to see democracy
succeed in Pakistan.
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045496
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
We also support Pakistan's sovereignty, but we are clear that all sovereign nations carry certain
obligations to protect the human rights of their citizens, to control their territory, to prevent
threats to their neighbors and the international community.
So we know that there is still much to be done, but I can assure the people of Pakistan that the
United States remains committed to this important relationship and we are confident we can
continue to move forward together one step at a time to reach our shared strategic objectives.
Thank you very much.
Remarks With Tunisian Foreign Minister Rank Abdessalem Before Their Meeting
September 21, 2012
SECRETARY CLINTON: Good morning. I am pleased to welcome the Foreign Minister from
Tunisia I'm looking forward to our meeting, We obviously have a great deal to discuss, and I
want to thank the Foreign Minister and the Government of Tunisia for their efforts over the last
week to help secure our Embassy and the American Cooperative School of Tunis following the
violent assaults of last Friday.
We are monitoring events closely today. There is no higher priority for President Obama and
myself than the safety of our people. We've taken a number of steps around the world to
augment security and to protect our personnel at diplomatic posts. And we are working closely
with host governments in this effort.
As I have said before and as is embodied in the Vienna Convention and other international
agreements, all governments have the duty, the solemn duty, to defend diplomatic missions.
They must be safe and protected places so that governments can exchange views and work on
many important issues, and leaders across the world must stand up and be counted in rejecting
violence and holding violent actors accountable.
We are working closely with the Government of Tunisia They have assisted us in enhancing the
security of our facilities. We've also discussed with them the imperative of bringing to justice
those responsible for these violent attacks. And we have offered and will continue to look for
ways that we can assist the new Government of Tunisia in ensuring the rule of law throughout
their country, first and foremost for the people of Tunisia themselves. We look forward to
continuing to build our hew partnership with the Tunisian Government and people. Our
relationship is built around the shared principles of all democracies — a commitment to
nonviolence, to tolerance, and inclusivity for all people, and to upholding the rule of law.
The Tunisian people have bravely put themselves on the road to democracy. They were the first
of the Arab revolutions and they have made important progress in a very short period of time.
They have worked too hard and sacrificed too much over too many years to see their progress
hijacked at derailed by extremists with Ulric own a5,-.
,
,encia. And those extreinists, not only in
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045497
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
Tunisia but in too many places around the world, look for opportunities to exploit this current
situation or other situations, and all people and leaders must stand against them.
So as the Tunisian Government takes steps to strengthen security and protect the Tunisian people
and economy from extremism and violent agendas, the United States stands ready to help. We
also are working closely with Tunisia on the broader shared threat of terrorism, including from
groups like al-Qaida and its affiliates.
So Minister, please know the United States remains committed to supporting Tunisia as you deal
with this current situation, as you continue your democratic transition, and we want to be with
you as you confront challenges and help seize opportunities together for the betterment of the
future of Tunisia.
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739812
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045498"
87;Fyi
87;"We are working with Schmitt, who is being a pain in the ass.
I feel okay about it."
87;"Mills, Cheryl D
Fw:
B3 CIA PERS/ORG
B6
Subject:
Per the discussion at Deputies, here are the revised TPs for HPSCI. Let me know what you think.
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739821
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045503
RELEASE IN PART B5,B3 CIA
PERS/ORG,B6"
87;Will do, as with the other.
87;FYI
87;"Thanks.
Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivanii@state.gov>
Thursday, December 20, 2012 1:25 PM
RE: H: Sure you've seen all this info, but start on graph 5. Sid
From H [rnallto:HDR220cliritonernail.com]
Sent: Thursday, December 20, 2012 12:40 PM
To Sullivan, Jacob 3
Subject Fw: H: Sure you've seen all this info, but start on graph 5. Sid
Fyi."
87;"Will do.
Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivanii@state.gov›
Wednesday, February 22, 2012 1215 AM
Re: Fwd: H: Libya, intel, internal conflict over militias, Sid
Prom: H [rnailto:HDR226clintonemailtom]
Sent: Tuesday, February 21, 2012 11:14 PM
To: Sullivan, Jacob
Subject: Fwd: H: Libya, Intel, internal conflict over militias. Ski
Pls review and forward as appropriate.
Sent from my iPad
Begin forwarded message:"
87;Latest from Gene.
87;"Definitely. I can share around if you like, but it seems like a thin conspiracy theory.
From H [malito:HDR220dintonemall.com]
Sent: Friday, March 09, 2012 7:40 AM
To: Sullivan, Jacob 3
Subject Fw: H: France & UK behind Libya breakup. Sid
This one strains credulity. What do you think?"
87;FYI
87;Can I call you in 30? Several items.
87;"Secretary Clinton's leadership on Libya
HRC has been a critical voice on Libya in administration deliberations, at NATO, and in contact group meetings — as well
as the public face of the U.S. effort in Libya. She was instrumental in securing the authorization, building the coalition,
and tightening the noose around Qadhafi and his regime.
February 25— HRC announces the suspension of operations of the Libyan embassy in Washington.
February 26 — HRC directs efforts to evacuate all U.S. embassy personnel from Tripoli and orders the closing of the
embassy.
February 26 -- HRC made a series of calls to her counterparts to help secure passage of UNSC 1970, which imposes
sanctions on Gaddafi and his family and refers Qadhafi and his cronies to the ICC
February 28 — HRC travels to Geneva, Switzerland for consultations with European partners on Libya. She gives a major
address in which she says: ""Colonel Qadhafi and those around him must be held accountable for these acts, which
violate international legal obligations and common decency. Through their actions, they have lost the legitimacy to
govern. And the people of Libya have made themselves
clear: It is time for Qadhafi to go — now, without further violence or delay."" She also works to secure the suspension of
Libya from membership in the Human Rights Council.
Early March — HRC appoints Special Envoy Chris Stevens to be the U.S.
representative to Benghazi
March 14— HRC travels to Paris for the G8 foreign minister's meeting.
She meets with INC representative Jibril and consults with her colleagues on further UN Security Council action. She
notes that a no-fly zone will not be adequate.
B6
B5
March 14-16 — HRC participates in a series of high-level video- and teleconferences
She is a leading voice for strong UNSC action and a NATO civilian protection mission.
March 17 —HRC secures Russian abstention and Portuguese and African support for UNSC 1973, ensuring that it passes.
1973 authorizes a no-fly zone over Libya and ""all necessary measures"" - code for military action - to protect civilians
against Gaddafi's army.
March 19— HRC travels to Paris to meet with European and Arab leaders to prepare for military action to protect
civilians. That night, the first U.S. air strikes halt the advance of Gaddafi's forces on Benghazi and target Libya's air
defenses.
March 24— HRC engages with allies and secures the transition of command and control of the civilian protection mission
to NATO. She announces the transition in a statement.
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739876
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045179
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739876
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
March 18-30— HRC engages with UAE, Qatar, and Jordan to seek their participation in coalition operations. Over the
course of several days, all three devote aircraft to the mission.
March 29 — HRC travels to London for a conference on Libya, where she is a driving force behind the creation of a
Contact Group comprising 20-plus countries to coordinate efforts to protect civilians and plan for a post-Qadhafi Libya.
She is instrumental in setting up a rotating chair system to ensure regional buy-in.
April 14 — HRC travels to Berlin for NATO meetings. She is the driving force behind NATO adopting a communiqué that
calls for Qadhafi's departure as a political objective, and lays out three clear military objectives: end of attacks and
threat of attacks on civilians; the removal of Qadhafi forces from cities they forcibly entered; and the unfettered
provision of humanitarian access.
May 5— HRC travels to Rome for a Contact Group meeting. The Contact Group establishes a coordination system and a
temporary financial mechanism to funnel money to the TNC.
June 8 — HRC travels to Abu Dhabi for another Contact Group meeting and holds a series of intense discussions with
rebel leaders.
June 12 — HRC travels to Addis for consultations and a speech before the African Union, pressing the case for a
democratic transition in Libya.
Late June — HRC meets with House Democrats and Senate Republicans to persuade them not to de-fund the Libya
operation.
July 15 — HRC travels to Istanbul and announces that the U.S.
recognizes the TNC as the legitimate government of Libya. She also secures recognition from the other members of the
Contact Group.
July 16— HRC sends Feltman, Cretz, and Chollet to Tunis to meet with Qadhafi envoys ""to deliver a clear and firm
message that the only way to move forward, is for Qadhafi to step down"".
Early August — HRC works to construct a $1.5 billion assets package to be approved by the Security Council and sent to
the TNC. That package is working through its last hurdles.
Early August After military chief Abdel Fattah Younes is killed, S sends a personal message to TNC head Jalil to press for
a responsible investigation and a careful and inclusive approach to creating a new executive council.
Early August HRC secures written pledges from the TNC to an inclusive, pluralistic democratic transition. She
continues to consult with European and Arab colleagues on the evolving situation.
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739876
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045180"
87;"FYI
---"
87;"FYI
From Stevens, John C
Sent; Monday, April 23, 2012 7:00 PM
To; Sullivan, Jacob)
Cc Cretz, Gene A; Fettman, Jeffrey
Subject RE: Latest from HRC friend
Jake- Interesting report. Gene is closer to the action and I defer to him on the latest Jail-ian thinking
and machinations vis-a-vis the cabinet and INC. I hadn't heard about ENI-related corruption but
wouldn't be surprised.
On the federalism issue,. Jail is right to be concerned about eastern agitation for autonomy. A
cabinet chance won't solve that problem, though. Nor will recruiting Belhaj and Islamist fighters to
take on the Bardans. To the contrary, it would only lead to unwanted bloodshed - the large Obeid
tribe still nurses a serious grudge against Belhaj and his ilk for the Islamists' presumed role in killing their
beloved Gen. Yunis last July and would probably put up a fierce fight.
The cabinet and INC need to have a serious discussion with the Bargans - if they aren't already
doing so - about how power and resources are to be distributed in the new Libya. The Libyans held
similarly heated debates on this very topic in the early1950s as they held their first parliamentary
elections and drafted their constitution (there were actually violent skirmishes in connection with
those elections, and Washington delayed the arrival of the first US ambassador until after things had
calmed down). Hopefully the current leadership can negotiate these issues peaceably in the
corning months. Of course, we and the UN and our other partners should encourage them to do so.
- Chris
SBU
This email is UNCLASSIFIED,
From; Sullivan, Jacob
Sent: Monday, April 23, 2012 5:31 PM
To: Stevens, John C; Cr, Gene A; Feltman, Jeffrey D
Subject Latest from HRC friend
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739878
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045185
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739878
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
Let me know your thoughts:
SOURCE: Sources with direct access to the Libyan National Transitional Council, as well as the highest levels of
European Governments, and Western Intelligence and security services.
1.On April 17, 2012 Libyan National Transitional Council (NTC) President Mustafa Abdel Jalil stated to a close
advisor that he is considering when, or even if, to hold a vote of no confidence in the NTC regarding support for the
government of Prime Minister Abdel Rahman al-Keib. According to a source with access to the NTC leadership, Jalil
realizes that a majority of the Council members no longer support el-Keib and his cabinet of Western educated technical
experts. Jaili continues to believe that, for the moment, the most important issue facing the NTC is the federalist
movement toward a semi-autonomous state in the Eastern region of Cyrenaica (Barge in Arabic). This situation continues
to complicate the NTC efforts to stabilize the country. With this in mind, Jalil expressed concern that a dramatic vote of no
confidence for el-Keib will weaken the entire NTC by association. Instead, according to this source, Jalil is considering
delaying a CiOCISI011, possibly putting it off until an elected legislature is in place in the late summer or early fall of 2012.
2. (Source Comment: In the opinion of this individual, the NTC has been able to reach a temporary
understanding with the eastern federalists, allowing the separatists to administer their local regions, while deferring to the
NTC for national and international issues. The complicating factor at this point lies in reaching a determination regarding
who has authority over new contracts with oil companies and other international firms. As of the week of April 16, 2012,
no decision has been reached on this point. The bulk of the NTC leadership is drawn from Barge, and Jalil now believes
they can control the situation if they can establish an organized central government. In particular, Jalil, according to a
sensitive source, is increasingly confident that the eastern roots of the NTC will allow him to balance the federalist
movement against the need for a sense of national unity. In the opinion of this source, el-Keib's future depends on Jalil's
opinion of his capacity to deal with this complex situation.)
3. Minister of Defense Ousama al Juwali is viewed by Jalil as the most important western Libyan in el-Keib's
cabinet, and the President and the leaders of the NTC had hoped that he would be able to deal with the confused security
situation in Tripoli. However, while he did receive assurances from General Abdel Hakim Alamin Belhaj regarding
possible assistance from his Islamist troops if fighting broke out between the National Army and the militia's loyal to the
eastern federalists. Unfortunately, from Jalil's point of view, this effort seems to have emboldened Belhaj and heightened
tension between the eastern and western portions of the country. According to this source, after reviewing the federalist
problem, Dr Abd al-Nasser Shamata, the head of the Crisis Management for the NTC, believes that el-Keib, al Juwali, Oil
Minister Abdulrahman Ben Yezza, and the bulk of the cabinet should be replaced by people drawn from within the NTC,
individuals who are in touch with the concerns of the Libyan people of all tribes and political groups. In the opinion of this
source Jalil is factoring this position into his decision on el-Keib.
4. Regarding the existing relationships with international oil firms, Shamata told Jalil that for the most part the
existing fields are continuing to produce and the owners have worked out security arrangements with local political and
tribal leaders. However, since el-Keib and Ben Yezza have been unable to bring order to the national administration, it is
difficult for firms to initiate new projects, since it is not clear who has the authority or the desire to sign such
agreements. Shamata stated forcefully that the Prime Minister, whoever he is, must establish an orderly administration
before full advantage can be gained from the oil fields. In the meantime, Shamata warns that his office has found
evidence of corruption between local officials and international firms. In this regard, he stated that local representatives of
the Italian national oil firm (ENI) have made problematic arrangements with local officials in the western part of the
country, where their oil fields are located. He added that most of these ENI employees are Libyans, but he believes ENI
management in Italy is aware of this situation. Shamata pointed out, without additional comment, that Ben Yezza is a
long time senior official of ENI.
5. In the opinion this source, Shamata and Jalil are not planning to publicize these charges regarding ENI, at least
until they decide how best to move forward on el-Keib, whether to allow the Prime Minister more time to address his
problems, proceed with the vote of no confidence or quietly ask him to step down on his own.
6. (Source Comment: According to this source, el-Keib is under fire primarily as a result of his failure to bring
order to the National Army, disarm independent militias, and establish security throughout the country. The leading
opposition to el-Keib is based in the Political Issues committee of the NTC, and as many as 42 of the 73 active NTC
members will vote against el-Keib if Jalil brings this matter to a vote. The source warns that these numbers are provided
by members of this Political committee, who may have their own agenda. A two thirds majority is required for the no
confidence vote, however; several senior members of the NTC are reluctant to take such a step until a constituent
assembly has been elected. They do not want this to look like the decision of a small group of people.)
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739878
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045186"
87;"FYI
Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivan.0@state.gov>
Friday, April 27, 2012 11:16 AM
FW: Talk with PM"
87;Will pass to Chris and Beth. To state the obvious, the ballot burning and helicopter shootdown are concerning.
87;Fyi
87;Yes. Some warning signs.
87;Your message was delivered to the recipient.
87;"We have just received an action memo seeking a timely decision on State's position on a trade dispute with
Mexico. EEB and WHA have competing recommendations.
First, some background. Mexico requested a WTO panel to resolve its tuna/dolphin dispute with the United
States U.S. measures prohibit Mexican tuna from being labeled ""dolphin safe"" even though the tuna is
harvested in accordance with the Agreement on the International Dolphin Conservation Program. However,
dolphin population recovery has not occurred as rapidly as expected under that Program. Despite the measures,
Mexico exported about $18 million worth of tuna to the United States in 2007.
17
18"
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ©state.gov>
Monday, March 23, 2009 10:12 PM
RE: Mexico tuna/dolphin case
I have already pinged WHA to get their recommendation on how to approach this tomorrow. I would guess a call to Kirk
and follow-up with the NSC. We will have a game plan first thing in the am."
87;"Attached is a draft of your Mexico trip report to POTUS. I'm also sending it by fax. I look forward to incorporating your
edits.
1Q"
87;Your message was delivered to the recipient.
87;Sounds good.
87;Your message was delivered to the recipient.
87;"Both I and others -- including Jim and Tom D feel very good about the statement.
Let me know if you have any questions.
Happy Easter! -
Jake"
87;"jake.sullivar
Saturday, April 11, 2009 6:56 PM
H
Delivered: Re: UNSCR/DPRK
details.txt
Your message was delivered to the recipient.
,"
87;"With apologies for the delay in getting back to you on this, below are the key admin attendees at AIPAC
conferences. For certain years in the 1990s, we're still looking for the participant lists.
2008: Rice spoke.
2007: Cheney spoke.
2006: Cheney spoke.
2005: Rice spoke.
2004: Bush spoke.
2002: Bush spoke.
2001: Powell spoke.
2000: Bush spoke.
1997: Gore and Albright spoke.
1996: President Clinton spoke.
1995: President Clinton spoke."
87;"Jake Sullivan <jake.sullivar _
Monday, May 4, 2009 10:02 AM
B6
cheryl.mills
Re: Fw: Some intel for you...
The below report is not consistent with what I know, which is as follows:
B5
On Mon, May 4, 2009 at 9:39 AM, H <HDR22@clintonemai1.com> wrote:
Do you know anything about this--from any angle?"
87;"Holbrooke would like to attend the Kazakhstan bilat. Bill Burns will attend, as will the ambassador and Richard
Boucher. I recall that you thought it didn't make sense for Holbrooke to join the Menon bilat (which Burns also
attended) so I wanted to check with you to see if you had views on this.
B6"
87;"Got it.
On Mon, May 4, 2009 at 4:08 PM, H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
Ok w me. India raised issues that this doesn't."
87;Yes I will get on it.
87;"We'll have this for you.
B6"
87;"Holbrooke's shop reached out to Danspeckgruber and offers the following update:
• Funding for railroads in and out of Afghanistan is on the agenda of next week's Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan in Islamabad. We are aiming for the Asia Development Bank
to agree to fund feasibility studies for railroad. If ADB agrees, then we will link up Dr Danspeckgruber
with the right ADB reps."
87;"yes -- happy to do so. this work is in full swing.
On Tue, Apr 21, 2009 at 8:55 PM, H <HDR22 !,clintonemail.com> wrote:
Could you work w Derek, Philippe and others to draft this report for us to send to the President after our next
trip?
We could workd on it during the trip. Let's discuss tomorrow. Thx."
87;"I will forward these changes - we have made a few other tweaks.
We believe that it is useful to distribute it as your brief oral testimony (you've been asked to speak for 7-10
minutes -- this is 11 or so).
On the E3+3 v. P5+1, they are identical, just different names.
On Tue, Apr 21, 2009 at 10:49 PM, H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
Pls forward the following questions/changes to Tomicah whose email address I do not have:
P3-- What is the E3+3 vs the P5+1?
B5"
87;"I'm being told -- and still trying to verify -- that as of last week, we've succumbed to the Europeans' preferred
term. That there was interagency discussion of this, and that going forward, we will join the rest of the world in
calling the P5+1 the E3+3.
This is the first I've heard of this, but I will track it down.
On Tue, Apr 21, 2009 at 11:03 PM, H <HDR22@clintonemai1.com> wrote:
Why don't we keep using P5+1?"
87;"I agree we should add Brazil to regional anchors, but worry about lumping India in with China and
Russia. Propose adding an India sentence in the Asia section.
On Tue, Apr 21, 2009 at 10:49 PM, H <HDR22@c1intonemai1.com> wrote:
Pis forward the following questions/changes to Tomicah whose email address I do not have:
P3-- What is the E3+3 vs the P5+1?"
87;"E is Europe.
E3 is UK, France, and Germany.
+3 is US, China, Russia
So it's the same 6 as the P5+1, just a different name.
On Tue, Apr 21, 2009 at 11:21 PM, H <HDR22@clintonemai1.com> wrote:
What does it mean? What is the E and who are the three?"
87;"And I feel ashamed that I had to subject you to this.
On Tue, Apr 21, 2009 at 11:31 PM, H <HDR22@clintonemai1.com> wrote:
I already feel safer."
87;"Internet can help free US reporters in NKorea: Clinton
US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton on Monday urged women students to use the Internet to campaign for the release
of two American women journalists held in North Korea. Clinton urged graduates of Barnard College, a women's
university in New York City, to show their opposition to Pyongyang's detention of the two journalists who are due to go
on trial on June 4.
""We have two young women journalists right now imprisoned in North Korea and you can get busy on the Internet and
let the North Koreans know that we find that absolutely unacceptable,"" Clinton told the graduation ceremony.
Clinton was highlighting the new media tools that women can use to fight injustice around the world.
North Korea announced last Thursday that it had set a June 4 trial date for the two journalists — Euna Lee, a Korean-
American, and Laura Ling, a Chinese-American — but gave no details of the charges against them.
Clinton said afterward that the announcement of a trial date is ""a signal that there can be"" a resolution of the case soon,
even though she said the pair should be released immediately and the charges against them are ""baseless.""
The North has previously said they would go on trial for ""hostile acts"" and illegally entering the country. Their trial would
be held ""on the basis of the confirmed crimes committed by them,"" it has announced.
While working on a story about refugees fleeing the hardline communist North, the pair were detained March 17 along
the narrow Tumen River which marks the border with China.
Internet can help free US reporters in NKorea: Clinton
US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton on Monday urged women students to use the Internet to campaign for the release
of two American women journalists held in North Korea. Clinton urged graduates of Barnard College, a women's
university in New York City, to show their opposition to Pyongyang's detention of the two journalists who are due to go
on trial on June 4.
""We have two young women journalists right now imprisoned in North Korea and you can get busy on the Internet and
let the North Koreans know that we find that absolutely unacceptable,"" Clinton told the graduation ceremony.
Clinton was highlighting the new media tools that women can use to fight injustice around the world.
North Korea announced last Thursday that it had set a June 4 trial date for the two journalists Euna Lee, a Korean-
American, and Laura Ling, a Chinese-American but gave no details of the charges against them.
Clinton said afterward that the announcement of a trial date is ""a signal that there can be"" a resolution of the case soon,
even though she said the pair should be released immediately and the charges against them are ""baseless.""
The North has previously said they would go on trial for ""hostile acts"" and illegally entering the country. Their trial would
be held ""on the basis of the confirmed crimes committed by them,"" it has announced.
7
While working on a story about refugees fleeing the hardline communist North, the pair were detained March 17 along
the narrow lumen River which marks the border with China.
8"
87;
87;"Your message was delivered to the recipient.
B6"
87;"We will confer in the morning and come up with a plan
Also, sent Huma some info on NK to pass on to you."
87;"Here is the situation as I understand it.
The film festival returned funds that it had received from the Israeli Embassy, after protests from some UK film figures
(Ken Loach) and Palestinian solidarity groups.
The Israeli director is now being funded directly by the festival.
The organizers issued a sort of apology today.
We have not been able to locate any State Dept response to similar episodes in the past (Israeli academics disinvited to
a British conference)."
87;My apologies — I was offline this morning. We will get you that document.
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sunday, May 17, 2009 10:06 AM
Re: Sri Lanke
I will be home in 15 minutes and can talk anytime."
87;"Just wanted to be sure you saw the Kurtzer op-ed, which ran Sunday in the Post. Kudos to Jonathan Prince for
getting this written and placed.
The Settlements Facts •
By Daniel Kurtzer
Sunday, June 14, 2009
Faulty analysis of the Israeli settlement issue is being passed off as fact. Charles Krauthanuner's June 5 column,
""The Settlements Myth,"" is one example.
Here are the facts: In 2003, the Israeli government accepted, with some reservations, the ""road map"" for peace,
which imposed two requirements on Israel regarding settlements: ""GO! [Government of Israel] immediately
dismantles settlement outposts erected since March 2001. Consistent with the Mitchell Report, GOI freezes all
settlement activity (including natural growth of settlements).""
Today, Israel maintains that three events -- namely, draft understandings discussed in 2003 between Prime
Minister Ariel Sharon and U.S. deputy national security adviser Stephen Hadley; President George W. Bush's
April 14, 2004, letter to Sharon; and an April 14 letter from Sharon adviser Dov Weissglas to national security
adviser Condoleezza Rice -- constitute a formal understanding in which the United States accepted continuing
Israeli building within the ""construction line"" of settlements. The problem is that there was no such
understanding.
The first event the Israelis cite is the 2003 discussions on a four-part draft that included the notion that
construction within settlements might be permitted if confined to the already built-up areas of the settlements.
The idea was to draw a line around the outer perimeter of built-up areas in settlements and to allow building
only inside that line. This draft was never codified, and no effort was made then to define the line around the
built-up areas of settlements. Nonetheless, Israel began to act largely in accordance with its own reading of
these provisions, probably believing that U.S. silence conferred assent.
Second, President Bush's 2004 letter conveyed U.S. support of an agreed outcome of negotiations in which
Israel would retain ""existing major Israeli population centers"" in the West Bank ""on the basis of mutually
agreed changes. . . ."" One of the key provisions of this letter was that U.S. support for Israel's retaining some
settlements was predicated on there being an ""agreed outcome"" of negotiations. Despite Israel's contention that
this letter allowed it to continue building in the large settlement blocs of Ariel, Maale Adumim and Gush
Etzion, the letter did not convey any U.S. support for or understanding of Israeli settlement activities in these or
other areas in the run-up to a peace agreement.
In his 2004 letter to Rice, Weissglas addressed the issue of the ""construction line,"" saying that ""within the
agreed principles of settlement activities, an effort will be made in the next few days to have a better definition
of the construction line of settlements in Judea & Samaria."" However, there never were any ""agreed principles
of settlement activities."" Moreover, the effort to define the ""construction line"" was never consummated: Israel
and the United States discussed briefly but did not reach agreement on the definition of the construction line of
settlements. Weissglas's letter also promised ""continuous action"" to remove all the unauthorized outposts, but
Israel removed almost none of them.
Throughout this period, the Bush administration did not regularly protest Israel's continuing settlement activity.
But this is very different from arguing that the United States agreed with it. In recent days, former senior Bush
administration officials have told journalists on background that no understandings existed with Israel regarding
continued settlement activity.
Commentators also focus on the Obama administration's reiteration that a freeze must include the ""natural
growth"" of settlements. Krauthammer says that this ""means strangling to death the thriving towns close to the
1949 armistice line. . . It means no increase in population. Which means no babies."" This is nonsense. No one
suggests that Israelis stop having babies. Rather, the blessing of a new baby does not translate into a right to
build more apartments or houses in settlements. The two issues have nothing to do with each other. Israelis, like
Americans, move all the time when life circumstances -- children, jobs, housing availability -- change.
The pattern of population growth in the territories actually undercuts the natural-growth argument. Since 1993,
when Israel signed the Oslo Accords, Israel's West Bank settler population has grown from 116,300 to 289,600.
The numbers in East Jerusalem increased from 152,800 to more than 186,000. This goes far beyond the natural
increase of families already living in the settlements. Inserting the provision of ""natural growth"" in official
documents started with the 2001 Mitchell Report and the 2003 ""road map,"" reflecting recognition that the
concept was being abused as a justification for expanding settlements. The Obama administration is pursuing
policies that every administration since 1967 has articulated -- that settlements jeopardize the possibility of
achieving peace and thus settlement activity should stop. This does not diminish the Palestinians'
responsibilities, especially their commitment to stop violence and terrorism and uproot terrorist infrastructure.
President Obama emphasized this in his Cairo speech. But Palestinian failures in no"" way justify Israeli failure to
implement their road map commitments with respect to settlements and outposts. It is time for Israel to freeze
all settlement activity and dismantle the unauthorized outposts.
The writer, US. ambassador to Israel from 2001 to 2005, is a visiting professor of Middle East policy studies at
Princeton University's Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs."
87;Roger on all counts.
87;
87;"I faxed a new, slightly revised version of the speech to your house. It is also attached.
92"
87;Soon as I saw it I emailed Bob Blake.
87;"Attached is the latest version of the speech, incorporating comments from Sandy and Strobe, as well as edits from
Cheryl and Anne-Marie and Lissa.
While it has improved, it has also grown in length. It is now just a bit shorter than your Senate confirmation
testimony. There are places to cut, but I want you to see it in full so you can make your own assessments.
John Podesta will send a few additional thoughts later today or tomorrow — the rest of his comments are captured in
this revised text.
Dennis is going to sharpen and hone the sections on the Middle East and Iran, and I will ask Holbrooke to work on the
Af-Pak piece.
I am available any time to discuss.
142"
87;"Jake Sullivan
Friday, May 29, 2009 8:59 PM
Reines, Philippe I (Special Use Only)
Brazil and Mexico"
87;"Yes. We had Jim raise this with the Greek ambassador yesterday, who told him that they were aware of the situation
and would come back with a report when Jim got to Corfu."
87;I will. Philippe is keeping Solomon informed -- he passed along a readout of Jim's conversation yesterday.
87;"You'll be happy to know that Jack and I have been working this weekend on behalf of our good friends in Palau. They
will be getting new numbers in the next round of negotiations. I will stay on top of it, though no matter what I don't
think they will be 100 percent satisfied."
87;"Sullivan, Jacob _I <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sunday, July 12, 2009 7:17 PM
H; cheryl.mills
Re: Speech
I literally just got off the phone with Jim Steinberg. He will have specific comments tomorrow, but his overall comment
was that t
(Apologies for any lack of clarity in how I relay these points -- I'm writing on blackberry and our conversation was brief.)"
87;"As the conversation with these two ministers unfold, you might make the point that we have come a LONG way
on Cuba so far -- and it would be really unfortunate to jam or embarrass President Obama after all the steps he's
taken, especially since what we are seeking is an entirely reasonable result.
Agreeing to lift the 1962 sanction is a BIG step."
87;"jake.sullivan
Saturday, May 30, 2009 9:31 AM
Re: Overarching message
Give me one minute --just tried reaching you thru ops on Cuba's response on migration talks"
87;"Jake Sullivan
Saturday, May 30, 2009 9:39 AM
See Sections 1 and 3 at the bottom. 1 is the replace, 3 is the lift."
87;"Will do
Sent from my BlackBerry® smartphone with SprintSpeed"
87;"Not yet. I'll check in with Tom but he expected to hear from Maria this evening.
In other news, one of the major loyalist paramilitaries announced its full disarmament today -- we're getting out a
statement soon.
(We also will have points and background for a Woodward call Monday.)"
87;Maria will see Morales tomorrow. We'll get you a readout shortly after the mtg concludes.
87;"Just heard from Rich Verma that Brownback has placed a hold on Kurt Campbell until he gets a vote on restoring NK to
the terrorism sponsorship list. I've made sure Steinberg knows.
76"
87;"Will do.
Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivan.11@state.gov>
Saturday, June 13, 2009 6:50 AM
Re: Startegy memo"
87;Tom and I started working to confirm this afternoon. I've talked to Miguel and once we know for sure we'll pass along.
87;"RELEASE IN
PART B5,B6
B5"
87;I will send latest to them. WH has reviewed too.
87;"Jim K. sent in some edits in the middle of the night -- strictly designed to trim/improve flow. Think it's worth you flipping
through to see if any strike you as worth making."
87;"Will do.
Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivanii@state.gov>
Wednesday, July 15, 2009 7:44 AM
Re: FW: 8:30 draft"
87;
87;
87;
87;
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivanil@state.gov>
Monday, June 29, 2009 10:40 PM
H; Mills, Cheryl D
Re: Honduras asks us to co-sponsor GA resolution for tomorrow's session"
87;"Zelaya's people. He is addressing the GA tomorrow. I am working it through with Tom and Dan and will send you final
text in am."
87;I think yes.
87;"1.4(B)
1.4(D)
Holbrooke is still trying to determine how to handle -- though our options appear to be very limited. Below is the latest
report.
4C.5"
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivann@state.gov>
Saturday, August 15, 2009 3:22 PM
H; Abedin, Huma
RCH now recommends you call tonight. He spoke with him earlier this week and judges that your call -- if heB1
take it -- could be effective and even if not will help us with theF7 1.4(D)
He proposes a simple message"
87;"Will do.
Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Saturday, August 15, 2009 3:27 PM
H
Re:"
87;"They are working on it. Eikenberry spoke with Karzai tonight and delivered a tough message. He will meet with Karzai
and Eide in am. We have only best guesses on where the plane is at the moment."
87;"Will do.
Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Saturday, August 15, 2009 4:20 PM
H
Re:"
87;"jake.sullivan
Sunday, August 16, 2009 6:57 AM
H
B6
1.4(B)
1.4(D)
B1
Sent from my BlackBerry® smartphone with SprintSpeed"
87;"RELEASE IN PART -
B1,1.4(B),1.4(D),B6
08/15/2024"
87;"Sent: Aug 16, 2009 7:03 AM
jake.sullivan
Sunday, August 16, 2009 7:10 AM
H
Re:"
87;"jake.sullivar B6
Sunday, August 16, 2009 7:22 AM
H
Re 1.4(B)
1.4(D)
B1
08/15/2015
I believe he is in Bangkok now. We can reach out now to fix a time, if you'd like."
87;"Will do.
B6
1 .4(B)
1 .4(D)
B1
jake.sullivan
Sunday, August 16, 2009 7:25 AM
H
Re
Also, I think I should reach out to Webb either now or soon."
87;"jake.sullivan
Monday, August 17, 2009 10:15 PM
H
millscd@state.gov
Honduras
RELEASE IN PART
B5,B6
Tomorrow morning you'll meet with WHA and Anne-Marie on Honduras.
Sent from my BlackBerry® smartphone with SprintSpeed"
87;"I will be out of the office until Wednesday, August 26th. If you need immediate assistance, please contact Cheryl Mills'
office at (202) 647 5548."
87;"Thank you for your kind words -- it's an honor to work for you. In the words of some wise person I heard recently, now
we have to deliver."
87;"I'll call him this week. I think we have this largely sorted.
Jeff and I go back to Puerto Rico and Guam in the primaries."
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J<Sullivan11@state.gov>
Wednesday, August 19, 2009 7:59 AM
H
Good morning -- I realized yesterday to my chagrin that I did not discuss with you taking a few days off. I'm in
Please don't hesitate to reach out if you need anything at all. Also, I will be taking this time to work up some stuff for
the QDDR and to think through how to advance your priorities and the major issues through the fall (I'll be on the phone
with Strobe and Sandy and others).
I will likely be back in next Monday, but am holding open the possibility of working remotely for a couple more days.
My goal is to be productive through excaping -- and to have a little fun on the side.
I hope you enjoy your time off and don't work to hard."
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Friday, July 24, 2009 4:51 AM
H
Steinberg memo
I spoke with both Kurt and Jeff about Jim's paper on Dai, which Huma has. Both were very impressed but had a number
of substantive thoughts.
They would cast the point in a different way,
which they are thinking through.
Kurt says that he will talk to Jim and then perhaps provide his own thoughts in a paper to you.
Meanwhile, I have asked Derek to do something resembling ""debate on a page,"" to distill the key points and objectives
into a single short document that can serve as a cribsheet and help you avoid the crushing burden of the paper in the
binder.
We are prepared to keep refining and improving the paper thru the weekend.
21111"
87;"RELEASE IN PART B5,B6
You were terrific on MTP. You'll be either happy -- or horrified -- to know that
conducted in front of the tv so the clan could watch.
A short while ago, Kurt sent me the below thoughts on your private conversation with Dai:
was largely B6
B5"
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Wednesday, August 19, 2009 4:51 PM
Mills, Cheryl D; H
Re: ANGOLA TO RECEIVE $500 MILLION INVESTMENT FROM RUSSIA
I've checked in with Johnnie on this."
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J @state.gov>
Tuesday, September 15, 2009 7:28 PM
H
Mills, Cheryl D
CG I
Declan spoke with WJC tonight. We also talked with a few other folks on the ground and in the Republic.
Wanted to check back in with you.
Also, I will be writing up our collective thoughts on the latest state of play to give to you this week."
87;"I'm tPrrihh, corn/ I've just received these message for some reason. I will get the memcon for this call and work to get
points together for a followup call this weekend."
87;"Wnac's or what . ;loulo say. iVlitchell just reported to me how strongly the Israelis feel that the POTUS and
I lorcrAuliy about it now. 4i?t1 they said if there is a vote in the UNGA that's the end of the peace process.
knt),iti.j Mitchell at my cutquest is calling Rahm and Dan Shapiro to report and be sure POTUS knows before
h , tapes"
87;"Su Ioe4-
.1: Negotiations with Iran
AftPr mtich KA& and frwth. the sneerh does not affirmatively indicate our willingness/openness to explore talking about
other iss with Iran. Bill's recommendation is that if you are asked about it, you should say we are open to exploring
06""lEt' Stti:e47.1
:5 in addition to the nciciebr iiie, but that you should not state that affirmatively.
87"
87;"Just spoke with her — says things are pretty grim. Abbas is in very precarious shape because of a combination of
Goldstone (and them handling it badly), the Hamas prisoner release, and Egypt ramming reconciliation with problematic
terms. Israelis recognize in principle that he needs help, but they won't budge on anything."
87;The facts will be right. Meanwhile, we're working to make it more of a semiautomatic.
87;Fyi.
87;"Attached and enclosed below is the demarche and letter that went out, reflecting your comments.
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE/LETTER PRIOR TO AUGUST 28 UNASUR SUMMIT
REF: A. STATE 86734
B. STATE 82581
1.(SBU) This is an action request, see paras 4 - 6.
2.(SBU) On August 14, the USG and Colombian government
provisionally agreed ad referendum to the text of a
bilateral Defense Cooperation Agreement (DCA) (septel).
We expect the final agreement may be signed in Bogota in
about a month, following a final review by both sides. As
noted in reftels, the DCA would permit the United States
access to several Colombian military bases and facilitate
effective bilateral cooperation on security matters in
Colombia. It would not/not authorize establishment of any
U.S. bases or ports, nor would it result in an overall
increase in the number of U.S. military personnel or
U.S.-citizen civilian contractors in Colombia.
3.(SBU) On August 18, the Secretary and Colombian FM
Jaime Bermudez met in Washington to discuss the DCA,
including the importance of coordinating our public
affairs and diplomatic strategies (septel to follow).
There is some concern that the upcoming Union of South
American Nations (UNASUR) summit would become a regional
referendum on the DCA. Colombian President Alvaro Uribe
will attend the summit provided that a full range of
regional security matters can be discussed, not just the
DCA. In this context, we are reaching out to selected
UNASUR members to ask that they raise other regional
security issues beyond the DCA.
4. (SBU) Action requested for Santiago, Asuncion, and
Lima: that you find an opportunity prior to the August 28
summit to raise the importance of discussing the full
range of regional security topics during the summit, and
not merely the DCA, with appropriate high levels of host
government.
265
5. (SBU) Action requested for all: that Ambassadors to
UNASUR member states deliver the attached letter from the
Secretary to host governments in advance of the August 28
summit.
6. (U) Begin text:
Dear Madam/Mr. Minister:
I wanted to take a moment to write to you and your
colleagues about the upcoming summit of the Union of South
American Nations (UNASUR), scheduled for August 28 in
Bariloche. UNASUR provides an important forum to address
the issues and challenges that affect the region. The
United States supports the formation and effective
functioning of regional groups such as UNASUR. They
promote stability, cohesion, and leadership on key issues,
and ensure the best possible communication between
nations.
As you know, our common neighbor,
Colombia, has faced an ongoing threat from an unholy
alliance of terrorist groups funded by the insidious
illegal narcotics trade. These terrorists have threatened
the security of average Colombians and sought to overthrow
by violence and corruption successive,
democratically-elected Colombian governments. The actions
of these groups also threaten the security of other
countries in the hemisphere, sometimes directly, in many
ways indirectly. Over the last decade, Colombians have
beat back this threat, to the benefit of us all. My
country is proud of the role we have been able to play in
this effort.
This battle is far from won. Our governments and people
are collectively forced to find ways to protect ourselves
and our institutions from such threats. I am certain
these very issues will be addressed at the upcoming
summit, including the recently concluded Defense
Cooperation Agreement (DCA). We understand the
sensitivities associated with U.S. military activities in
the hemisphere and the questions your government may have
regarding the scope and extent of this agreement. I hope
the efforts made in the last few weeks by both my
government and the Colombian government have helped
address those questions.
I would like to take this opportunity to make several key
points about the DCA. First, this agreement is a
bilateral agreement with Colombia to deepen our
cooperation on security challenges within Colombia,
permitting U.S. access to specified agreed Colombian
26fi
facilities to undertake mutually agreed activities on
Colombian territory. It is a bilateral agreement that
does not pose any threat or risk for the citizens of other
nations. On the contrary, our mutual efforts to combat
drug trafficking benefit the security of the region as a
whole. The agreement does not permit the establishment of
U.S. bases in Colombia. It will not result in an increase
in the U.S. military presence in Colombia, and we do not
seek any such increase. Activities undertaken at or from
Colombian bases by U.S. persons will be coordinated in
advance by Colombian authorities. All activities will be
based on full respect for the principles of sovereignty,
territorial integrity of states, and
non-interventionism.
We are committed to being as forthcoming as possible in
addressing concerns about this bilateral agreement with
nations in the region, and we have endeavored to do so in
recent weeks through a variety of mechanisms. As concerns
or questions arise, I hope that you will feel free to
reach out to us to seek clarification.
The UNASUR summit provides a unique opportunity for the
organization to address a range of security issues that
affect the hemisphere, and I salute your leadership for
deciding to discuss these matters. The security
challenges affecting our hemisphere, and your nations in
particular, are pressing and grave. Our firm belief is
that a collective and collaborative approach to these
matters is essential. It is our commitment to work with
UNASUR nations to help address these concerns.
Sincerely yours,
Hillary Rodham Clinton
End text."
87;"FYI: We will send today for your review and approval a demarche describing the circumstances in which the U.S. would
walk out of speeches at the UN General Assembly and asking countries to join us in the walkout. Note that we are
differing from past practice when we simply did not have anyone in the U.S. seat during speeches by certain countries.
This year an appropriate-level individual will be behind the U.S. placard for all speeches and will remain unless these
redlines are crossed.
This demarche is going out to EU member state capitals, as well as Oslo, Reykjavik, Ottawa, Canberra, Wellington, Tokyo,
Seoul, Buenos Aires, Bogota, San Jose, and Montevideo. USUN asks that our posts deliver the demarche in advance of an
EU political directors meeting on this issue in New York Monday morning our time.
The background portion of the cable, which discusses EU internal dynamics on this issue, is classified, but the
unclassified talking points will come to you for your review."
87;"I will be out of the office Monday October 12 through Wednesday October 14. I will have very little access to email. If
you need to reach me on those days, please email Monica Hanley at hanleymr@state.gov, or call Monica at (202) 647-
5601."
87;
87;"The confusing thing is that the list is organized differently in the schedule (alphabetical) and the briefing (in order of # of
troops contributed). It is the same ten countries."
87;Fyi
87;Fyi
87;"Sullivan, Jacob i <Sullivanii@state.gov>
Sunday, November 1, 2009 7:21 AM
H; Abedin, Huma
Fyi for Eikenberry call"
87;Apologies. I can come down now if you'd like.
87;Yes coming now
87;
87;The speechwriting crew is taking Sid's points below and massaging them into a set of remarks.
87;Tomicah, with Sid continuing to collaborate.
87;"Importance:
FYI
Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Wednesday, November 18, 2009 8:17 AM
H
Fw: Rendez-vous in Kabul....
High
B6"
87;FYI. Craig is on his way to Honduras now.
87;Corning
87;"Importance: High
Just following up on a few items.
First, see below on Nagorno-Karabakh.
Third, on QME, Gates and Barak are meeting the week of UNGA and we are holding until then if you are comfortable
with that.
Fourth, Declan Kelly is going to be in Belfast Monday and Tuesday with Lou Susman. I will be there Tuesday for all of the
official meetings. Declan and I will stay Tuesday night after Lou leaves and have dinner with a broad cross-section of
folks.
Fifth, I'm working with Holbrooke's and Lew's shops on the materials for Af/Pak, and we'll have a concept paper over
the weekend on the UNGA curtain raiser.
Sixth, Mike Fuchs and I met with Team WHA on Mexico, following up on Carlos' memo. Mike is working with WHA to
ensure that we create a productive agenda and outcomes for the Merida meeting you will participate in at UNGA.
(SBU) Reports about an alleged lethal incident along the line of contact in Nagorno-Karabakh remain
unconfirmed. The potential implications on the peace process are not yet clear. At the moment, regional
leaders are responding cautiously and the impact on other regional processes does not appear
significant. The Armenian Ministry of Defense denied any unusual activity along the line of contact; the
Azerbaijan Ministry of Defense told media that incidents are frequent along the line of contact. Embassy
Yerevan reports that it is customary to deny reports of sniper incidents along the line of contact, but that an
incident of this magnitude would be difficult to cover up. Embassy Baku notes that President Aliyev is in
Kazakhstan and local authorities could be waiting for his return before deciding on how to proceed. Neither of
our Embassies have been able to confirm local media reports.
John L. Espinoza
Deputy Director
Office of Caucasus Affairs and Regional Conflicts
Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs
Department of State
17€:
Tel: 202-647-6795
Fax: 202-736-7915"
87;
87;"for purposes of submission of testimony to committee/public release, how do you want to handle? may have to
send to hill before/concurrent with call.
On Wed, Dec 2, 2009 at 7:59 AM, H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
Ok let's discuss in call."
87;
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Saturday, September 12, 2009 2:58 PM
H
Re: Question"
87;
87;DRL did not have any more definitive sourcing on this. Does the below provide what you need?
87;DRL did not have any more definitive sourcing on this. Does the below provide what you need?
87;DRL did not have any more definitive sourcing on this. Does the below provide what you need?
87;Will do.
87;Will do.
87;Will do.
87;FYI
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Friday, December 4, 2009 3:31 AM
Iran
The EU meets in the coming days, and we are hoping for a strong public - and private - position on Iran. Bill has
identified 5 countries that need touching to help drive a good outcome:
I know Huma has discussed with you, but a 2-minute discussion with each that underscores the key points reflected on
your card would do the trick, if you can swing it.
Tx. Also, the intervention, with your modifications, turned out well. The process, in this case, did not generate a good •
enough product -- I tried to make it clearer and stronger this morning and your amendments helped a lot."
87;It starts at 2. I will call to give you a download as it unfolds.
87;"We'll see what comes of this, but...
Meanwhile, Amorim was in Esfahan, Iran with Mottaki yesterday.
Brazil signals recognition of Honduran election
(AP) –40 minutes ago
RIO DE JANEIRO —A top Brazilian official has signaled that Latin America's largest nation may recognize the Honduran candidate who won
last weekend's post-coup presidential election.
Dilma Rousseff is chief of staff for Brazilian President Luiz !neck) Lula da Silva. Rousseff says the Central American country's Nov. 29 election
should be considered separately from the June 28 coup that ousted ex-President Manuel Zelaya.
Previously, the government had said it would not recognize the election unless Zelaya was returned to office and allowed to serve out his term,
which ends Jan. 27.
Rousseff told Brazilian television late Friday from Germany that the coup ""is one thing"" and ""discussing the election"" another.
She says ""this new process"" — the election — ""has to be considered."""
87;"The below is from Karl Eikenberry, who recommends you call Karzai. Richard wrote in to second what Karl wrote.
Recommended talking points:"
87;"We could reach out in the next couple of hours or alternatively early tomorrow. The Eikenberry points sent last night,
plus Holbrooke's add'n, provide a good roadmap.
Let us know how you'd like to proceed."
87;"Got a readout from Rich. We still have work to do on the cables, which we'll do at our session with Eikenberry
tomorrow. The July 2011 date was a trouble spot too -- but there is no excuse for that and that got mostly sorted by the
end.
Everything else was good.
My sincere apologies for missing elements of prep today -- I had to deal with some personal stuff that unfortunately
interfered.
Rich and I have organized a session for tomorrow to nail things down with Karl."
87;Got it. It's on my list to track down today.
87;"As I mentioned, you will be receiving a binder of NPR documents tonight. I mischaracterized the structure of the
binder. The cover note is merely an extended table of contents, and behind it are six 2- or 3-pagers on the six major
questions on which they seek your guidance. The papers are technical, and some are easier to read than others, but it is
worth a quick scan tonight before they march through them tomorrow."
87;"Good question. Strobe will know the answer on good sounding boards. I know that he spends a fair amount of time
with nonpro/arms control types of all stripes. I will check in with him."
87;"There are a number of different possibilities for how the decision on the Guinea/Madagascar credentials may go
tomorrow. (It is Zambia and Tanzania bringing the challenge on behalf of the AU.) I was under the impression that we
would not have to vote on the potential credentials challenges. We may have to.
We may have to vote on a motion to *deny* them credentials and exclude them. For the moment, the guidance is to
vote to credential all countries — including these two — as is customary, while conducting outreach with Tanzania,
Zambia, and the AU to exnlain that WP have our own imnpratives hut ma cunnnrt thp fart that they are taking a
principled stand.
We may have to vote on a motion to *defer* decision, which would allow them to be seated and vote but would not
formally grant credentials. For the moment, the guidance is to potentially support such a motion — this was the practice
with respect to South Africa between 1983 and 1994. Everyone is in the same place on this.
Ultimately, however, the whole thing may die of its own weight. This is probably the most likely outcome."
87;FYI
87;"We'll have the specials summarize the key points of the memcons and circulate them to RCH and senior NSC folks, if that
works for you."
87;Here it is -- came in overnight. Huma will have copy for you this morning.
87;Will do on both counts.
87;We are meeting with you at noon to discuss.
87;I have asked about the abstention possibility and they are looking into the mechanics.
87;"Landler has called me twice -- I haven't called back because I don't want to go down the road.
I talked to Matt and off-handedly asked about the issue -- he said that people are deeply unhappy with our friend, but
not much else. Said he didn't think anything was imminent. But it was not a very optimistic conversation."
87;FYI
87;Got it -- will follow up. Has Tom been in touch? Matt said he would be this morning.
87;Yes will do.
87;Thanks. I passed on to Ron as well and clarified it was to do with W Sahara.
87;See below. Todd also wrote a short while ago to say the following:
87;"Whoops. ..to say:
HRC should come. Danes expect all day Thursday for discussions with and among leaders to resolve open issues.
Discussed this with Danish leaders today. Think this very important. This is looking more and more difficult, so I'm
certainly not promising success. But bad if we don't try full out. Thanks pal."
87;"Per the plan, a statement is being released in your name. This is the same statement you saw in the memo package
from Mitchell:
Today's announcement by the Government of Israel helps move forward toward resolving the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. We believe that through good-faith negotiations the parties can mutually agree on an outcome which ends the
conflict and reconciles the Palestinian goal of an independent and viable state based on the 1967 lines, with agreed
swaps, and the Israeli goal of a Jewish state with secure and recognized borders that reflect subsequent developments
and meet Israeli security requirements. Let me say to all the people of the region and world: our commitment to
achieving a solution with two states living side by side in peace and security is unwavering."
87;
87;"I've asked Todd to identify the specific areas where he thinks progress can be made through discussions on Thursday.
At a high level, I think leaders' conversations on Thursday will begin to narrow gaps on the big issues -- transparency,
funding, inscribing commitments, etc -- IF (and it's a big if) those gaps are narrow-able. If they're not, then
Thursday/Friday will be days of trying and failing ... but at least trying.
Todd's view is that there is not enough time Friday for top-level meetings to close the deal; that two days are required.
You would be our head of delegation for the first, POTUS for the second."
87;"Will get back to you on the specific process, but my understanding is that it will be a series of bilats and possibly some
working sessions. You can meet with leaders; harder for Todd or Chu to do so."
87;"Netanyahu gave a press conference a few hours ago. I've seen plenty of his quotes in stories. Let me see if I can find
transcript."
87;Will do.
87;"Will do. Below is the formal statement that was released in the PM's name:
Today, my cabinet authorized a policy of restraint regarding settlements which will include a suspension of new permits
and new construction in Judea and Samaria for a period of ten months.
My cabinet authorized this far reaching step because of our deep desire for peace.
We hope that this decision will help launch meaningful peace negotiations to reach a historic peace agreement that will
finally end the conflict between the Palestinians and Israel.
We are committed to working closely with the United States to advance peace and security in the region.
We have been told by many friends that once Israel takes the first step towards peace, the Palestinians and the Arab
world would respond positively with steps of their own to create a virtuous cycle of goodwill.
Well, the government of Israel is taking a very big and difficult step toward peace today.
I hope that the Palestinians and the Arab world will seize this opportunity to work with us to forge a new beginning and
a new future for our children and for their children.
Since the day our government was sworn in eight months ago, we have been calling for direct negotiations with the
Palestinians.
During that time, we have taken many concrete actions to improve daily life for the Palestinians and to create a climate
in which political negotiations would have the best chance to succeed.
We have dismantled hundreds of roadblocks and checkpoints, extended the hours of operation on the Allenby Bridge
and removed bureaucratic obstacles to Palestinian economic development.
These actions have helped spur a surge, a boom, in the Palestinian economy. At the same time, the security
environment has improved thanks both to the efforts of the IDF and to the efforts of better trained PA security forces.
Now we wish to add to this improved economic and security climate meaningful political negotiations.
I have already said that we will not build new settlements and that we would not expropriate additional land for existing
settlements.
I said we would also restrain settlement activity, and that's exactly what we decided to do today.
I promised to enable normal life to continue for the three hundred thousand Israeli citizens, our brothers and sisters,
who live in Judea and Samaria.
That is why this suspension will not affect construction currently underway.
It will not include the schools, kindergartens, synagogues and public buildings necessary for the continuation of normal
life over the time period of the suspension.
Obviously, any infrastructure that may be needed to protect our national security or to safeguard the lives of our citizens
will also be provided during this time.
Regarding Jerusalem, our sovereign capital, our position is well known. We do not put any restrictions on building in our
sovereign capital.
As always, we are committed to protect freedom of worship for all faiths and to ensure equal and fair treatment for all
the city's residents, Jews and Arabs alike.
When the suspension ends, my government will revert to the policies of previous governments in relation to
construction.
I want to say clearly to the Palestinians: Now is the time to begin negotiations. Now is the time to move the peace
process forward. There is no more time to waste.
Israel has taken a far reaching step for peace. It's time for the Palestinians to do the same."
87;Daniel R is going to get it to him, along with your statement, highlighting what you've said about 1967.
87;"Answers under each:
Will I receive a full notebook for approps hearings tonight?
Yes, and a draft of the testimony.
I'd like a call this afternoon or evening to go over the draft Af-Pak regional strategy. Who should be on call? It is quite
good but lacks ""milestones"" and budgets for each section.
Sounds good. Huma and I will work to set it up. The budget issue is complicated we've had several discussions about
it. It's hard to put down numbers with confidence.
Call should be with Jack, Piper, Rich, Paul Jones, and Sean Misko.
Re the required report for Kerry-Lugar, I want to be sure that the language in both our report and this one echo the
same language.
Paul, Sean, and Rich are going back over to make sure of that. Our chief method is to use framing language from the
strategy to frame the KLB report as well.
I never called Patricia Espinosa—should I?
Will check with WHA.
Also, have we rec'd a memo from Shaun Woodard for Robinson and McGuinness calls?
Huma should have this memo for you.
There will also be a PC on Af-Pak Tuesday and I want to be sure our report is ready.
Yes -- this is consistent with our timeline."
87;I've flagged again for Jack and team. We'll work on it.
87;"Bob, Jose, and in particular John Byerly in EEB. He did the heavy lifting on this. I'll check on who else might need a
shoutout."
87;Also -- Arturo and Craig say hold on Espinosa for now.
87;Also -- Arturo and Craig say hold on Espinosa for now.
87;"See the story below. Consensus recommendation is that you call PR and MM tomorrow or Wednesday. Because we
expect them both to go to the press after they speak with you, we believe it would be best for you to keep the calls at a
very high level. Essentially:
O Two months have passed since your trip to Belfast and you're checking in;
• You're concerned about the news reports;
O You understand that there are substantive differences and frayed nerves, but you want to encourage all parties
to take positive actions and avoid unhelpful ones;
• You remain prepared to assist in any way — you are personally invested in seeing them work through to the
completion of this process;
• Declan is hard at work, but his efforts are hampered by the lack of progress and the public conflict
You would be mostly in listening mode and wouldn't engage substantively on the issues that are dividing them — parades
(Sinn Fein doesn't want to concede anything on parades without a date for devolution) and a date (DUP doesn't want to
set a date until they get progress on parades).
If you're amenable, we-can move forward and schedule the calls.
Thanks,
Jake"
87;"Sorry -- meant to send earlier:
China sees no chance of climate deal - source
Thu Dec 17, 2009
Print I Single Page
By Krittivas Mukherjee and Pete Harrison
COPENHAGEN (Reuters) - China has told participants in the U.N. climate change talks that it sees no possibility of
achieving an operational accord this week, an official involved in the Copenhagen talks said on Thursday.
Dozens of heads of state are descending on the Danish capital to address the December 7-18 conference, and had hoped
to sign on Friday a new pact to tackle global warming.
The official, who asked not to be identified, told Reuters the Chinese had instead suggested issuing ""a short political
declaration of some sort,"" but it was not clear what that would say.
The official said negotiations were continuing to try to reach a breakthrough that would still allow an operational
agreement to be signed. The official said the sticking point for China appeared to be a process issue.
U.S. President Barack Obama has called for an ""operational accord"" -- essentially a political agreement with teeth that
can get countries working to cut or curb their greenhouse gas emissions while a more formal and binding treaty is
hammered out in 2010.
Some ministers warned that slow, often stalled talks during the summit meant it was staring at failure.
""We may not get there on the substance, it is quite possible we'll fail on the substance, but at least let's give it a try,""
said Britain's energy and climate minister Ed Miliband.
""At the moment the problem is we're not giving it a try.""
Developed and developing nations are at odds over who should cut emissions, how deep the cuts should be, and how
much funding should be provided to poor countries to help them shift to greener growth and adapt to a warmer world.
While the overall picture is bleak, there has been some progress in areas critical to reaching a deal.
Africa dramatically scaled back its expectations for climate aid from rich nations, and Japan pledged about $11 billion
(6.8 billion pound) in public funds to 2012 to help poor countries adapt to a warmer world and cut their emissions.
Talks on a U.N.-backed system to pay poorer nations to curb deforestation have advanced, and the United States
pledged $1 billion in short-term funds to conserve tropical forests.
A major sticking point between the world's top emitters, the United States and China, has been the question of how
they will prove they are sticking to emission-curbing plans.
On Tuesday, China's climate change ambassador warned developed countries against using climate change as an excuse
to set up trade barriers. Yu Qingtai said rich nations should not think that slapping carbon tariffs on imports from
countries with different emissions control regimes would substitute for reaching a global deal to tackle warming."
87;On it.
87;"Arturo made a comment publicly about the fact that he had heard from US business interests that the judicial system in
Argentina had deteriorated.
Argentine press pounced — this is apparently a sensitive issue.
Craig is sending me news summaries."
87;"Here is the news summary:
A/S Valenzuela's Trip to South America: Valenzuela in Argentina Chile's El Mercurio reports that the visit of A/S
Valenzuela resulted last night in another misunderstanding between Washington and Buenos Aires because of
statements by the US official regarding the management of the Argentine economy. Controversy arose over statement
by Valenzuela during a restricted meeting with the local press in which he echoes the concerns of American
businessmen in that country regarding ""judicial insecurity"" and the management of the economy. Valenzuela, also
indicated that has been noted ""change"" in the investment climate for US businesses and reminded those present that
""in 1996 there was a great deal of enthusiasm regarding investment"" in Argentina. The Argentine Foreign Ministry
responded in a communiqué that the government ""has not received complaints from US business with interests and
investments in the country."" Interior Minister Florencia Randazzo lamented that ""some officials revert to old practices""
when there is the expectation of a new period in US foreign policy."" Argentina's Clarin carries the same story titled
""Official Anger with Obama's Envoy Because He Spoke about Judicial Insecurity"" with the Interior Minister's riposte
""Argentina is living in a period of complete judicial and institutional guarantees"" and the nation ""has left behind the
period in which an official of another country can tell ours what guarantees should exist to benefit its own
interests."" INFOBAE.com adds that Minister of Justice Julio Alak described Valenzuela's statements as ""unprecedented
and unjustified."""
87;Well, there's something.
87;FYI
87;Sorry -- I had to step out for a bit. Heading back now.
87;Fyi
87;Will do.
87;We'll work with Rich on this.
87;"We would need Tom and Craig's guidance as to when the appropriate time is and what our people would actually
do on the ground."
87;"Levin opposed the surge, but voted for funding the troops.
Pasted below is Levin's speech on troops in Afghanistan. We'll have a copy for you as well.
Afghan speech below
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
September 11, 2009 Contact: Senator Levin's Office
Phone: 202.224.6221
Senate Floor Speech - Surge the Afghan Army
Remarks as prepared for delivery
Today we mark a solemn anniversary. Eight years ago this morning, our nation was attacked by terrorist extremists
motivated by hatred and bent on destruction. It is always appropriate to remember the shock of that day, the innocent
lives lost, and the efforts our nation has made since that day to ensure that Afghanistan, the nation that hosted those
terrorists, cannot again become a safe haven for terrorists seeking to attack us. But today is an especially appropriate
occasion to take stock of those efforts, and consider how best to continue them.
I recently returned from a trip to Afghanistan, where I was joined by my colleagues Senators Jack Reed and Ted
Kaufman. The situation in Afghanistan is serious. Security has deteriorated. But if we take the right steps, we can ensure
that Afghanistan does not revert to a Taliban-friendly government that could once again provide a safe haven for al
Qaeda to terrorize us and the world.
The Obama administration's new strategy, focusing on securing the Afghan population's safety and partnering with the
Afghan security forces in that effort, is an important start at reversing the situation in Afghanistan. The change in
strategy has led our forces, in the words of General McChrystal's Counterinsurgency Guidance, to ""live, eat and train
together [with the Afghan security forces], plan and operate together, depend on one another, and hold each other
accountable....and treat them as equal partners in success."" The Guidance goes on to say that the success of the Afghan
security forces ""is our goal.""
To achieve that goal we should increase and accelerate our efforts to support the Afghan security forces in their efforts
to become self-sufficient in delivering security to their nation — before we consider whether to increase U.S. combat
forces above the levels already planned for the next few months. These steps include increasing the size of the Afghan
Army and police much faster than presently planned; providing more trainers for the Afghan Army and police than
presently planned; providing them more equipment than presently planned; and working to separate local Taliban
fighters from their leaders and attract them to the side of the government as we did in Iraq.
While the security situation in Afghanistan has worsened, we still have important advantages there. The Afghan people
hate the Taliban. Public opinion polls show support for the Taliban at about 5%. In addition, the Afghan army is highly
motivated and its troops are proven fighters.
Despite those advantages, we face significant challenges. General McChrystal believes, and I agree, that we need to
regain the initiative and create a momentum towards success. General McChrystal worries, and rightly so, about the
perception that we have lost that initiative, and the impact of that perception on the Afghan people, their government,
al Qaeda and the Taliban. By contrast, if we can dispel that perception, we have a chance to convince local and lower-
level Taliban fighters to lay down their arms and rejoin Afghan society.
I believe the most effective way to retake the initiative in Afghanistan is with a series of steps to ensure that
Afghanistan's army and police have the manpower, equipment and support to secure their own nation.
First, we should increase troop levels for the Afghan army and police faster than currently planned. There are
approximately 90,000 troops in the Afghan army now, and that number is scheduled to go up to 134,000 by October of
2010. The Afghan police are scheduled to reach a level of 82,000 by the same time. For a long time, many of us have
urged the establishment of a goal of 240,000 Afghan troops and 160,000 Afghan police by 2013. The Afghan Minister of
Defense has strongly supported those numbers. It now appears that our government and the Afghan government are
prepared to accept those goals. But the need for additional Afghan forces is urgent. I believe it both possible and
essential to advance those goals by a year, to 2012.
Our own military in Afghanistan has repeatedly pointed to a need for more Afghan forces. In one sector of Helmand
province we visited last week, our Marines outnumbered Afghan soldiers by 5 to one. A Marine Company commander in
Helmand province told the New York Times in July that a lack of Afghan troops ""is absolutely our Achilles heel.""
What do we need to do to increase the size of the Afghan army and police? According to Afghan Defense Minister
Wardak, there is no lack of Afghan manpower; we've been assured it is available.
But we will need significantly more trainers. We asked General Formica, who is in charge of the American effort to train
Afghan security forces, whether such an increase is possible. He indicated he would make an assessment of what would
be necessary in order to meet the earlier timetable. In the meantime, we should also press our NATO allies with much
greater forcefulness to provide more trainers. If our NATO allies are not going to come through with the combat forces
they have pledged, at least they could provide additional trainers.
Larger Afghan security forces will also require more mid-level Afghan officers. In addition to supporting efforts to
graduate more Afghan officers from army academies, we should consider the recommendation of Defense Minister
Wardak that previous mid-level officers who fought the war against the Soviets return to service on an interim basis.
Minister Wardak emphasized that those men are well qualified and well motivated, and while they may not be trained in
the most current tactics, they nonetheless could temporarily meet the need of the enlarged army while the new group
of officers is trained. A larger Afghan force will need supporting infrastructure, such a barracks. While the available
infrastructure may not be the most modern, it is adequate and exists in sufficient amounts.
Larger Afghan security forces will require additional equipment. There must be a major effort to transfer a significant
amount of the equipment that is coming out of Iraq to the Afghan army and police. Such a significant commitment to
equip the Afghan security forces would also help demonstrate U.S. determination to take the initiative and create
momentum in the right direction. There is an enormous amount of equipment coming out of Iraq; our military is calling
it one of the greatest transfers of military goods in the world's history. A significant part of it could be transferred to the
Afghan forces, increasing their capability without weakening our own readiness. And yet there does not seem to be that
kind of a crash effort in place to do that. We need to obtain on an urgent basis a list of the basic equipment needs of the
Afghan forces and a list of how those needs could be met in a major program to transfer equipment leaving Iraq.
Rapidly expanding Afghanistan's military and police forces would address one of the major problems and risks we now
face there. General McChrystal told us he worries that waiting until 2013 for a larger Afghan force creates a gap in
capabilities that brings significant risk of failure. But by accelerating the training and equipping of Afghan forces by a
year, we address his concern. Depending on additional capability from Afghan, rather than U.S., forces, also addresses a
major problem of public perception in Afghanistan. The larger our own military footprint there, the more our enemies
can seek to drive a wedge between us and the Afghan population, spreading the falsehood that we seek to dominate a
Muslim nation.
Finally, we should make a concerted effort to separate the local Taliban from their leaders. In Iraq, large numbers of
young Iraqis who had been attacking us switched over to our side and became the ""Sons of Iraq."" They were drawn in
part by the promise of jobs and amnesty for past attacks, and in part by the recognition that the status quo was creating
horrific violence in their own communities. In their own interests and the interests of their nation, they switched sides
and became a positive force.
That same prospect exists in Afghanistan. Afghan leaders and our military say that local Taliban fighters are motivated
largely by the need for a job or loyalty to the local leader who pays them and not by ideology or religious zeal. They
believe an effort to attract these fighters to the government's side could succeed, if they are offered security for
themselves and their families, and if there is no penalty for previous activity against us.
General McChrystal himself has emphasized the potential of such re-integration to accomplish the same result as was
achieved in Iraq. Here is what General McChrystal said on July 28th:
""Most of the fighters we see in Afghanistan are Afghans, some with foreign cadre with them. But most we don't see are
deeply ideological or even politically motivated; most are operating for pay; some are under a commander's charismatic
leadership; some are frustrated with local leaders. So I believe there is significant potential to go after what I would call
mid- and low-level Taliban fighters and leaders and offer them re-integration into Afghanistan under the constitution.""
But this ""game changing"" possibility was apparently not factored into General McChrystal's assessment. There is no plan
yet to put in place a Sons of Iraq approach in Afghanistan. It is urgent that we lay out the steps that need to be taken to
involve local and national Afghan leaders in that effort. They alone can accomplish this crucial job, but first we and our
Afghan allies must draft such a plan on an urgent basis. And the potential positive impact of such a plan should be taken
into account as we consider the need for any additional U.S. military resources.
Afghanistan's people are grateful for our aid, but also eager to assume responsibility for their future. In a tiny village in
Helmand Province, we were invited to meet with the village elders at their council meeting, their shura. One hundred or
so men sat on the floor and chatted with us about their future and their country's future. When asked how long the
United States should stay, one elder said: ""Until the moment that you make our security forces self-sufficient. Then you
will be welcome to visit us, not as soldiers but as guests.""
Helping Afghanistan achieve self-sufficiency in their security is everybody's goal. On that there is little difference of
opinion, in Afghanistan's village councils or in the corridors of this Capitol.
Can we help Afghanistan reach self-sufficiency in security fast enough? Can we get there in a way that regains the
initiative and creates the momentum we need? Can we encourage those lower level Taliban to abandon an insurgency
headed by terrorists whose fanaticism they don't share?
I believe we can, by supporting a far more rapid growth in the Afghan Army and police; by providing more trainers more
quickly; by a rapid infusion to Afghan units of equipment no longer needed in Iraq; and by rapidly adopting a plan for the
re-integration of lower level Taliban fighters into Afghan society. In other words, we need a surge of Afghan security
forces.
Our support of their surge will show our commitment to the success of a mission that is clearly in our national security
interest, without creating a bigger U.S. military footprint that provides propaganda fodder for the Taliban.
I believe that taking those steps on an urgent basis, while completing the previously planned and announced increase in
U.S. combat forces, provides the best chance of success for our mission: preventing Afghanistan from again being run by
a Taliban government which harbors and supports Al-Qaeda, whose goal is to inflict additional catastrophic attacks on
the United States and the world. And we should implement these steps before considering an increase in U.S. ground
combat forces beyond what is already planned by the end of this year."
87;"Pakistan —total enacted since FY 2002 — FY 2009 is $8 billion (including all function 150 - foreign assistance, state and
USAID ops)
Afghanistan — total enacted FY 2001 — FY 2009 is $16.9 billion (same as above)"
87;"Gordon Brown called Lou Susman a short while ago. Brown believes you should make a call to McGuinness this morning
around 830 am (Declan and I agree that if you call McG you also must call Robinson). Brown proposes to speak with you
at 820 or so to bring you up to speed before those calls.
The current situation is that Brown and Cowen are in Belfast, and met with Robinson, McGuinness, and other parties
until 330 in the morning Belfast time. They have now resumed today. The sticking point is parades. Robinson wants the
current parades commission abolished because it gives Republicans too much say. McGuinness refuses to allow the
parades issue to be tied to the devolution issue.
The key message to McGuinness is to keep working this thing through -- not to take any drastic action that would bring
down the assembly or collapse the process.
Declan agrees that this is the moment to make calls.
If you agree we can have the ops center set up the Brown call as well as the other two.
We'll get you some more background before the calls, but talking points will be fluid and shaped in large measure by
Brown's report."
87;FYI
87;"Jake Sullivan
Tuesday, January 26, 2010 8:14 AM
H; Abed in, Huma (Clinton)
call sheet
Call_Sheets jjs.docx
Attached and pasted below is material for the calls
Calls to Brown and Northern Ireland Political Leaders
PM Brown has asked to brief you on ongoing negotiations convened by the UK and Irish
governments yesterday with FM Peter Robinson and dFM Martin McGuinness and their
respective teams, which lasted until 3:30 a.m. in the morning and resumed at 9:00 a.m. today.
Sinn Fein and the DUP are apparently not yet meeting face to face at Hillsborough but using the
two governments as go betweens. On-site observers have characterized the current atmosphere
between the two parties as ""poisonous.""
B6
were invited to Hillsborough yesterday night. However, these
parties tell us that this was only an informational exercise and they have yet to be included in
any substantive meetings.
Outstanding Issues: The obstacle to progress seems to be centered on the parades issue and
setting of specific dates for devolution. Robinson and the DUP are insisting on the abolishing
of the Parades Commission, an independent panel despised by the Orange Order as restricting
their desire to parade through nationalist areas, and the adoption of a new process relying on
local councils to refer potentially contentious parades to an OFM/dFM selected panel. Sinn
Fein and SDLP are both concerned that this will politicize decision-making on parades and
PSNI involvement.
In late December, the UK government renewed the Parades Commission's mandate until
December 2010, so it is expected that any new process would not be implemented until after the
summer 2010 parading season.
B1
1.4(B)
1.4(D)
Key points:
B5
Outcomes: If McGuinness resigns (likely along with the other SF ministers) thereby collapsing
the current Executive, the Northern Ireland Act provides for seven calendar days for a new
Executive to be formed. Failing that, the Assembly cease to operation and Secretary of State
Woodward is supposed to schedule new elections though he is not required to do so within a
certain timeframe. (Technically, it would take at least five weeks to organize new Assembly
elections.) B1
1.4(B)
1.4(E)"
87;We hope so. Craig will explore tomorrow am.
87;"The team proposes to release the following statement under your name tomorrow
I think it works. Please let me know what you think:
Statement by the Secretary
On the Restoration of Democratic and Constitutional Order In Honduras November 27, 2009
The United States remains committed to help restore the democratic and constitutional order in Honduras in the wake
of the June 28 coup d'etat that removed President Zelaya and led to the suspension of Honduras from the Organization
of American States. As part of that effort, it is essential for both parties in Honduras to implement the measures they
agreed to in the Tegucigalpa-San Jose Accord, including the formation of a government of unity and national
reconciliation and the December 2 congressional vote on President Zelaya""s restitution. These are vital elements of the
Tegucigalpa-San Jose Accord, and the Honduran people and the international community expect an expeditious
determination. We look forward to the Congressional deliberations getting underway as announced.
The November 29 national elections are another critical step in the restoration of the democratic and constitutional
order in Honduras. The electoral process -- launched well before June 28 and involving legitimate candidates
representing parties with longstanding democratic traditions from a broad ideological spectrum -- is conducted under
the stewardship of the non-partisan Supreme Electoral Tribunal, which was also selected before the coup. The electoral
renewal of presidential, congressional and mayoral mandates, enshrined in the Honduran constitution, is an inalienable
expression of the sovereign will of the citizens of Honduras. We wish the Honduran people well as they choose their
new leaders on Sunday, and we urge all sides to exercise their rights peacefully.
The holding of a free, fair and transparent election is necessary but not sufficient for Honduras to reestablish the
democratic and constitutional order. In order to help achieve that objective, we will continue, along with others in the
region, to support the step-by-step implementation of the Tegucigalpa-San Jose Accord as a democratic way forward for
the Honduran people. The president-elect who emerges from an election deemed free and fair will have a unique
opportunity to promote that vital mission."
87;Of course!
87;Let me know what you think.
87;"RELEASE IN PART
B1,1.4(B),1.4(D)"
87;FYI.
87;"Here's the update, pieced together from various sources:
Starting at around 3 pm Friday, Adams and McGuinness returned to Hillsborogh to meet with Robinson and Arlene
Foster. The four talked privately for several hours and then asked for the draft papers to review. The discussion
continued until around 1 am when the parties left Hillsborough. (Foster's presence is apparently very helpful. Her
relationship with the SF leaders is much more positive and direct, treating them as equal colleagues.)
Woodward and Irish FM Martin will meet with Adams and Robinson separately this afternoon to assess where the talks
are. The talks last night/early morning ended more positively and if that is still the case there may be a decision to push
on today to see if agreement can be reached. It is equally possible that the two ministers and DUP/SF will decide to
wind up today and resume on Monday.
Brown and Cowen have spoken this morning and will speak again late this afternoon.
The issue is still parades. Robinson needs some certainity of change on parades. It is important for him politically within
the DUP, but also externally since this has become a symbol of whether he has achieved something or compromised too
much. Adams and SF have moved very far from their original positions on parades, adding that Robinson has also
moved.
The DUP linkage of the timeframes for devolution and parades is not Robinson's goal but DUP deputy party leader Nigal
Dodds. Logistically, such a linkage would be impossible without delaying devolution given that the parades framework
requires consultation, legislation, and implementation.
The role of Justice Minister and his/her relationship to the Executive has been agreed. Other issues, such as Irish
language act, N-S bodies, etc, while symbolic and emotive for SF and the nationalists community can be dealt with."
87;"Happy New Year to you as well! It's been an honor to work for you. I'm excited -- and bracing -- for the work ahead.
As for business, I've sent along the outline for the year-end POTUS report and the first weekly Af-Pak report."
87;It's 745 pm -- they're still talking. British think it's reasonably positive.
87;"With your permission, we are changing the statement to spokesman's name rather than yours. Makes it a more generic
statement of U.S. policy and holds you in reserve.
We have tweaked the first paragraph to make clear our expectation.
On Mexico, consensus is that a call is worthwhile, but we will get you an updated call sheet that accounts for intervening
events.
The remaining Honduras related call sheets are also coming your way.
Please let me know if I can help with anything else."
87;"According to Woodward, the likely announcement as been delayed till 3 p.m. (Belfast time) due to the need for
additional consultations — between SF and DUP and then DUP with its Assembly and MP caucus. Time of announcement
may be further pushed back. Will keep you informed."
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Friday, November 27, 2009 4:47 PM
H
Fw: Call from Sam Lewis
Fyi"
87;"FYI
^"
87;"Missed Shaun, but was just on the phone with his COS, who said there are still some details to be worked out Monday.
She ""wouldn't put a full stop on it,"" but things are looking very good.
Looks like tomorrow will be a down day and then they'll reconvene Monday to try to bang out the last details and
announce."
87;"Just tried emailing you but not sure it went through --
Missed Shaun, but talked to his COS a short while ago. She said there are still a few details to be worked out Monday.
She ""wouldn't put a full stop on it,"" though things are looking very good. Tomorrow will be a down day and they'll
reconvene Monday to bang out last details and (hopefully) announce.
I'll be in touch with other people in the morning and give you there reports.
Will also check in with DecIan!"
87;
87;Will do.
87;Fyi
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sunday, January 31, 2010 10:35 AM
H
Woodward
You're set to go to talk to Shaun at 11. Those we spoke with today confirm that a deal is close and likely. Low level work
happening today; Robinson consulting w DUP tomorrow am."
87;"Interesting observations from DecIan:
Foster was a critical component in the talks apparently. However there is already speculation that PR may use this
moment to try to come back early and resume position of FM given that the other investigations have been delayed
pending the outcome of the police investigation. He went to London with his family yesterday to visit his wife, who is in
a clinic there apparently.
Empey still not on board apparently so the ""community confidence"" round may be used to put pressure on him to do so.
Our intervention on Thursday night/Friday morning was seen as a very important moment/catalyst. That, coupled with
the jobs losses that day and the fact that the radio and tv phone-in lines and newspapers were full of commentary
supporting what we said, seems to have made people realize, that they couldn't lose the moment."
87;Got readout from ops -- will be prepared.
87;"Brown has asked to speak with you at 8 am tomorrow morning.
Also, I just spoke with Declan about the conference. There are challenges with the idea of a conference that I'd like to
discuss with you in the morning."
87;FYI below. Harold is proposing to send substantive views on the Pfizer case
87;"First, Tom's travel date hasn't been set -- will be Tuesday or Wednesday we think. He is coordinating with Dan Restrepo
to see if they can go together.
1.4
B1
— Reason: 1.4(D) — Declassify on: 06/29/2024
(D)
1.4(D)
B1
So that's where we are. We'll have more to report tomorrow."
87;Fyi
87;FYI.
87;"RCH came to agree with Frank R. over the weekend that we should hold off on a call by you. I am sitting down with Paul
in a bit and will provide a further update."
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ©state.gov>
Monday, December 28, 2009 2:09 PM
RE: Karzai call?
B5
Just talked to Holbrooke on the slopes of Telluride.
Karzai is preparing to announce his intention to proceed with the election on schedule. He has lined up Qanooni in
support.
SRAP is preparing a memo of potential options for how to move forward on this. When we have the memo I will be sure
to get it to you pronto.
If Paul has anything to add/amend, I will be sure to let you know."
87;Yep. I can't warrant the quality of the outline but I've reserved time this week to plug away on it.
87;Will call in 10 mins -- getting into work.
87;"Blair's guy said you ok'ed releasing today. If so, we'll pull the trigger. It is pasted below:
Statement by the Secretary
This Administration has, from the beginning, worked to bring about comprehensive peace in the Middle East, including a
two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. On that issue our approach has been three-fold: (1) to help build the
economy and capacity to govern of a Palestinian state; (2) to renew political negotiations to enable the earliest possible
establishment of that state; and (3) to achieve these in a manner that ensures the security of Israel and of the
Palestinians.
Consistent with Prime Minister Fayyad's plan for a future Palestinian state, Tony Blair, as the Quartet representative, will
intensify his partnership with Senator Mitchell in support of the political negotiations. In his role as Quartet
Representative Tony Blair will continue, with full support by and coordination with Senator Mitchell, to mobilize the
efforts of the international community: (1) to build support for the institutional capacity and governance of a future
Palestinian State, including on the rule of law; (2) to improve freedom of movement and access for Palestinians; (3) to
encourage further private sector investment; and (4) to bring change in the living conditions of the people in Gaza."
87;"Please know that you and WJC are in my prayers.
I spoke to Ellen tonight, who is preparing a memo and will have it Monday.
Pasted below is a draft letter that our Ambassador plus French and Russians will be working on tomorrow in Vienna,
ideally to deliver to Amano,"
87;This relates to the letter from yesterday. FYI prior to call with Kouchner.
87;"See the report below: Pinera has announced his support.
I had a long conversation with Craig a little while ago. He spoke with a number of people in Chile, including his close
friend,
According to Craig, Pinera had made the calculation that it would be politically untenable to dump Insulza. Apparently
there is a coalition leadership in the lower house, and Insulza's party, Concertacion, controls the upper house. So he had
no choice.
That said, Craig believes that his clear message had an impact on what Pinera told Insulza. He apparently gave his
support with two conditions: (1) don't interfere in Chilean politics, and (2) take the democratization agenda seriously
and don't carry the ALBA countries' water.
Craig also said that Arturo had been effective in making clear that the jury was out on Insulza in Washington -- that had
an impact on the Pinera government and reinforced their second message to him.
Bottom line: Craig said we couldn't have talked Pinera off of this, but we helped drive a stronger set of conditions on
Pinera's support."
87;That's great news! See you tomorrow. I will have a long list to share...
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Saturday, February 13, 2010 12:42 PM
H
FW: Doha speech
Megan had a long, and I think productive, conversation with Judith about the speech this morning. You are absolutely
right on the tone, and Judith helped Megan work through adjustments
I just spoke with Megan, who is now taking another turn through it."
87;"Yes -- in the draft they received, violent extremism came first They
also gave comments on how to frame the Middle East portion -- Megan is working that. And they had a number of
specific edits on phraseology and the like."
87;"Funny you mention it -- nearly everyone who has given comments on the speech has tried their hand at ""improving"" that
paragraph (usually reflecting their own notions of what the endstate should look like), not recognizing that it is sacred
language. We're protecting it."
87;"...Are asking about what the mounting evidence is that Iran is building toward a bomb. They are taking it as a little
different from previous formulations.
We're saying Qom, 20 pct enrichment, refusal on TRR, etc."
87;You still up?
87;"I confess that I will never understand how Shaun decides when to call me, DecIan, Lou Susman, or Sid with breaking
news. So many channels!
We've been hearing all day that Peter would take a back-me-or-sack-me public vote of his party. Hopefully tomorrow
will be the day -- and hopefully he'll be successful.
In an interesting show of strength, he has announced he'll resume as First Minister."
87;"process
FYI — we're getting a copy to your house as well."
87;"I haven't forgotten. While we were in the Gulf I asked Phil and Liz and the DCM-note-taker to send everything they had.
I will find time to compile today.
Will be a fun project!"
87;FYI
87;"He was scheduled to talk to Ryabkov this am to talk through resolution elements and to check in on missile defense, etc.
I will follow up."
87;"on: 02/20/2025
Below is a barebones readout he typed out on his blackberry and sent to Alice, his exec asst, this morning. 1.4(B)
1.4(D)
Quick bberry readout of 40 min call Sat am from Frankfurt airport. B1"
87;It's a good point. We'll get with Phil et al and sort this through.
87;
87;"DUP has gone behind closed doors at Stormont and the smart money is on them emerging at some point supporting the
deal.
There was movement today on the ancillary issue of government support for the Presbyterian Mutual Society, a savings
and loan that lost a lot of money and whose investors didn't get the same financial crisis protections as those in other
institutions. DUP members are pointing to that as enough of a carrot to change their posture on the policing and justice
deal.
Brown and Cowen are poised to go to NI tomorrow. Will keep you posted."
87;We have remarks for you. I recommend calls to PR and MM before you do the press.
87;"PM and Taoeiseach will announce deal around 9.30 gmt tomorrow after a plenary of all the parties. I recommend you
do a treaty room statement early tomorrow our time. Will send proposed remarks in a few minutes.
Also recommend you call Shaun tonight if you're available."
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Thursday, February 4, 2010 8:00 PM
Abedin, Huma
Statement
This will be cleaned up a bit, but here you go:"
87;FYI. Seeking info.
87;Not yet. Will keep tabs.
87;"Pretty good stuff!
Robinson and McG have confirmed to speak with you.
In his remarks, Brown indicated that you would host an investment conference this spring. Declan believes this is much
too soon. We might try to steer it to you meeting with Robinson and McG this spring — ie in a few weeks time -- with an
eye toward an investment conference once it is well prepared.
I think we are okay waiting an hour to do the statement, but we'll work to get excerpts out. Kamala announced that you
are speaking at 830."
87;"I have a good story for you on this. Your 830 statement will be first react. But I will have them release excerpts of your
statement now."
87;"Brown mentioned you and your role. Kamala was there at their invitation representing you. She told everyone that you
would speak at 830."
87;"This did not occur to me. I'm not sure it's a good idea -- there has been a heavy emphasis on how this deal was made in
NI. Calling Declan for his take."
87;"DecIan thinks bad idea because sends wrong message to NI and because this is your moment.
Philippe thinks practically impossible to do."
87;"Here is what Brown said:
Let me thank the American Government for their unstinting support -- especially Secretary of State Clinton, her efforts
over these last few weeks. And Presidents Obama, Bush and Clinton. And we particularly welcome Secretary of State
Clinton's initiative today that she will host a Northern Ireland Investment Conference this spring."
87;"Sorry -- just seeing. Ryabkov called for Ellen this morning and they are set to talk at 1030. Plan is for her to deliver same
message and go to Geneva this evening."
87;Declan urges that you be somewhat vague w invites to PR and MM and steer clear of inv conference
87;We're here next door and about to check in w cdm.
87;"They may seek Geithner's co-signature on the letter, if they can get him while he's in Canada snow-boarding. You can't
make this stuff up."
87;"The team proposes to put out the following statement in Ian's name tonight. We are weighing a recommendation to put
out a statement in your name tomorrow.
We commend the Honduran people for having exercised peacefully their democratic, sovereign and inalienable right to
select their leaders. The apparently large and enthusiastic turnout shows that given the opportunity to express
themselves, the Honduran people have viewed the election as an important part of the solution to the political crisis in
their country.
We look forward to continuing to work with all Hondurans and encourage others in the Americas to follow the lead of
the Honduran people in helping advance national reconciliation and the implementation of the Tegucigalpa-San Jose
Accord. Significant work remains to be done to restore democratic and constitutional order in Honduras, but today the
Honduran people took a necessary and important step forward."
87;"Will do. Before the plan was simply to have GB present and Cameron to respond. I'm trying to figure out what the
element of surprise is adding here."
87;"FYI. The latest thinking is that this would be a Clinton-Ashton statement. We'll make sure you have a chance to
see/approve final, and we can work to incorporate any changes you have now."
87;Text not set. Among other things, they're still working through whether to mention detainees.
87;Agreed. We are doing so. Looks like tomorrow or Sat
87;Funny timing given Farrow email, which I can discuss further with you.
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Monday, January 18, 2010 11:26 AM
H
MINUSTAH document
RELEASE IN PART B5"
87;"Sorry -- just seeing. In short, they might have made a bad word choice. They should have said ""reconcile"" instead of
""achieve both."" But having done it, they've got to play out the string with the Pals, who would be suspicious of the
change. But if AM says no on Monday, Mitchell is open to changing it. If AM miraculously says yes, then they'll have the
leverage to push it through with BN. Can elaborate on plane.
They didn't admit they made a bad word choice - that's my interpretation."
87;Will do.
87;FYI.
87;For your approval.
87;Here you go:
87;Roger.
87;Fyi
87;"Smart money seems to be on the thing coming out OK tomorrow -- a heavy prologue on all the reasons they don't
believe the process will lead anywhere,
1.4(D)
B1'
Declassify on: 08/26/2040"
87;Tx
87;Talked to Jack, who is meeting with Tom, Michele and Floss C tomorrow at 730 on AfPak and will raise the Chile issue.
87;FYI
87;Yep -- will follow up.
87;"I understand from Joe that you are reviewing the key material for the human rights reports. You might talk to Mike
Fuchs, who I asked to go thru the key reports with a fine-toothed comb."
87;Fyi
87;"RELEASE IN PART
B1,1.4(B),1.4(D),B6"
87;"During the transition, Time.com did a top ten cabinet members list. Reich was #9.
See list below.
Harold L. Ickes
2.
Henry Wallace
3.
Henry Morgenthau Jr.
4.
George Marshall
5.
Robert F. Kennedy
6.
William Ruckelshaus
7.
Elizabeth Dole
8.
Richard Riley
9.
Robert Reich
10.
Robert Gates
Here is what they wrote about Reich:
Robert Reich
Secretary of Labor, 1993-1997
A former Rhodes Scholar, Reich served as the 22nd Labor Secretary under President Bill Clinton. Among his
accomplishments were helping to implement the Family and Medical Leave Act, raising the minimum wage and leading a
crackdown on sweatshops. He currently serves as an adviser to President-elect Barack Obama and is a professor at the
University of California, Berkeley."
87;"Removing Megan. Lamplighter is teapot story with Joyce McCarran that you stripped from Stormont. Here is what I
wrote to Megan (nothing about it being ""off-limits""!):
""She cut the Lamplighter example from her Stormont speech because she thinks she's played it out. Not sure how she'll
feel about it in this speech."""
87;Lamplighter is teapot story with Joyce McCarran
87;"Jim is very agitated by some maneuverings related to the NPR. I should bring you up to speed on it when you have a
moment."
87;"There was a garble on the middle east meeting. It's not chiefly on Mitchell travel or related issues. It's chiefly on how to
deal with the nuclear issue in the context of the upcoming summit. Though with the players at the table..."
87;They know, but she is not on the invite list. I will work on that.
87;"Gibbs and Pi will/have deployed these:
• Some of the comments made yesterday by President Karzai are troubling and a cause for real concern.
• Together with our international partners, the United States is making great sacrifices and investing substantial
resources to defeat al Qaeda and its extremist allies, and to create opportunities for the Afghan people. As
President Obama has said, we have vital security interests in the region, and we are committed to helping
Afghanistan become strong, stable and prosperous.
• We would reiterate the commitments that both Presidents made during their visit last weekend. We are
discussing this with President Karzai and his Administration and we are seeking clarification of his remarks."
87;"Conference Summary - Rough.docx; Note to S on Karzai 1 Apr Press Conf to send.docx;
Tab A Karzai 1 April Press Conference Summary - Rough.docx
Importance: High
Attached are materials on Karzai that RCH has discussed with you."
87;"— Declassify on: 04/02/2025
Readout of conversation with Omar Zalchilwal, Afghan Minister of Finance
April 2, 2010
Barnett R. Rubin
B1
1.4(B)
1.4(D)
B1
1.4(B)
1.4(D)
Barnett R. Rubin
B6"
87;Cc: Abedin, Huma
87;I think it's only 815 there now.
87;"See the piece below on defamation of religion. Not bad.
http: I /www.economist.com/world/international/displavstorv.cfm?story id=15833005
Religion and human rights
The limits of freedom and faith
Mar 31st 2010
From The Economist print edition
Opponents of a bid by Muslim states to ""protect religion"" claim a small success
How dare you call us blasphemers?
IT DOES not happen often: Christian lobbyists, the sort who favour prayer in American classrooms and
crucifixes in Italian ones, lining up on the same side as secularists who battle to curb religion's role in the
public square. But in both those camps there has been some quiet satisfaction after a recent vote at the
United Nations. Not over the outcome, but over the slim margin of defeat.
On March 25th the Human Rights Council (HRC), a Geneva-based UN agency which often exasperates its
Western members, voted by 20 votes to 17, with eight abstentions, for a text that lists the ""defamation of
religion"" as an infringement of liberty. Nothing amazing there: the Organisation of the Islamic Conference
(OIC), which groups 56 mainly Muslim states (plus Palestine), has been working to push resolutions of
that kind through the General Assembly and other UN bodies since 2005. But the margin was the smallest
ever, and opponents think there could be a good chance of defeating a ""defamation"" motion next time one
comes around.
The OIC's idea is to establish the principle that faiths need protection, just as individuals do. It denies any
sinister intention (see article). And to some ears, the OIC's effort sounds like harmless UN-speak, but
nothing more. (The United States Commission on International Religious Freedom, a congressionally
mandated body, has noted a logical flaw: defamation means harming the reputation of a living person or
entity: that implies that one can't defame an idea or a religious founder who is no longer, at least
physically, alive on earth.)
But critics of the OIC campaign, who include atheists, Christians and indeed some Muslims, say the
""defamation"" idea is worse than hot air: far from protecting human rights, it emboldens countries that use
blasphemy laws to criminalise dissent. What encourages these critics is that more countries seem to be
coming around to their view. Mexico, Uruguay, Argentina, Zambia and South Korea voted against the
latest resolution. Brazil criticised the text but abstained.
Deeper still inside the UN's bureaucracy, another battle over religion rages—and the stakes could be even
higher. An ""ad hoc committee"" is mulling ways to amend or extend the UN convention on racial
discrimination. Certain states want language that would fuse the categories of race and faith; some want a
new convention, or a protocol to the existing one.
For secularists (in the broad sense of people, including believers, who oppose the idea of faith having
privileged access to power), all this is alarming. Non-binding resolutions against defamation are bad
enough; a UN treaty on race-plus-religion would have legal force, at least for its signatories, and give
heart to theocrats.
At the HRC's latest discussion of this effort in March, the Algerian who oversees the project was keen to
plough ahead. But countries like Switzerland, Japan, Mexico, Argentina and France retorted that it would
be better to enforce the existing UN norms than dream up new ones. Efforts to widen the racism accord
will resume, with a new chairman, late this year—but critics are relieved to have stalled it. Still, would-be
theocrats may now focus harder on adding to the racism charter, because they face a real risk of being
defeated over defamation, in the view of Roy Brown, Geneva spokesman for the International Humanist
and Ethical Union.
Meanwhile a Christian-inspired NGO, the European Centre for Law and Justice, has been denouncing the
abuse of blasphemy laws in many OIC member states. How fair is their point? It is an easy case to make,
for example, over Pakistan.
Some 41 complaints of blasphemy were registered by police in Pakistan last year, says that country's
independent Human Rights Commission. In theory, blasphemy is punishable by death—a penalty that has
been handed down but never carried out. Worst-hit by the law are minorities like Christians and Ahmadis,
a group whose claim to be Muslim is rejected by the Pakistani state. Although abuse of the law is less rife
now than in the 1980s, when an Islamist general tightened up the rules, the law is still invoked in disputes
(over property, say) that have nothing to do with faith.
""The most vulnerable people, that is religious minorities, continue to be charged with
blasphemy,"" said Ali Dayan Hasan, a researcher at Human Rights Watch, a campaign group.
""But are people convicted? No. Rarely. It is used as an instrument of political and social
coercion.""
When convictions occur, they lead to long jail terms; and pre-trial detention can last for years. Pakistan's
parliament is revising the constitution but it has left intact the religious bits, despite a vow by the ruling
party to review the blasphemy laws. (Indonesia too has stepped back from a move to liberalise its
blasphemy regime.)
On Pakistani streets, the law has dire effects. In January 2009, in a village in Punjab province, five
Ahmadis, a labourer and four children, were charged with blasphemy. They had supposedly written
""Prophet Muhammad"" on the wall of a mosque toilet. The children were behind bars for nearly six months
till the charge was quashed.
And last September a young Pakistani Christian was accused of throwing part of the Koran down a drain.
It seems that his real crime, however, was affection for a Muslim woman. A mob torched a church, and
many Christians had to flee. He was taken to jail, where he died a few days later. His family alleged
torture; the authorities claimed suicide. There was mayhem at the funeral and the country's Christians
(see picture) were appalled. In some places, it is not the ""defamation"" of faith that threatens rights but
measures that supposedly defend it."
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Friday, April 2, 2010 12:38 PM
H
FW: Karzai points
These are the points in circulation now for comment. Understand Eikenberry is reaching out to speak with you. He has
this draft."
87;"Cc:
Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Friday, April 2, 2010 12:57 PM
Abedin, Huma"
87;"I would simply reiterate the need for a statement *FAST* and say that the embassy can follow up. This will help both of
us."
87;Here is what I'm proposing:
87;"One thing I missed:
Currency deferral decision likely tonight."
87;"Cc: Abedin, Huma
Happy to chat at your convenience"
87;I think we're fine on this.
87;You should definitely read Ignatius this morning.
87;Fyi
87;"I will be out of the office Wednesday March 17 through Friday March 19. I won't be carrying a blackberry and will have
very little access to email. Please call me through ops if it is urgent. Otherwise, please email Mike Fuchs at
fuchsmh@state.gov."
87;"Fyi -- not sure of timing of your call.
Terrible news about Poland.
I'm on the ground and reachable at your convenience."
87;Perhaps my Cuba question from last night was ill-timed!
87;See below. Meeting with embassy folks now -- will report on that and dinner later.
87;Peres said something similiar recently. Let me track down.
87;"See below from Mitchell. Will send an email with thoughts on Kabul later tonight.
The following is a summary
1.4(B)
1.4(D)
B1
— Reason: 1.4(B), 1.4(D) — Declassify on: 04/11/2030"
87;FYI - Boeing has made a significant number of military sales to European countries. Can get you more details.
87;"FYI see below - first time since 1968 that they've allowed privatization in the retail sector.
EXCLUSIVE - Cuba handing beauty, barber shops over to workers
Mon Apr 12, 2010 11:05pm 1ST
By Marc Frank
HAVANA (Reuters) - Communist Cuba is turning over hundreds of state-run barber shops and beauty salons to
employees across the country in what appears to be the start of a long-expected revamping of state retail services by
President Raul Castro.The measure marks the first time state-run, retail-level establishments have been handed over to
employees since they were nationalized in 1968.Barbers and hair dressers in telephone interviews from a number of
cities during the weekend said they would now rent the space where they work and pay taxes instead of receiving a
monthly wage.Those employees who do not wish to rent are being offered other jobs or retirement"
87;"Below is a proposed statement to go out in an hour or so. Also, did you see the Pakistanis arrested Adam Gadhan, the
American al Qaeda spokesman?
STATEMENT BY SECRETARY CLINTON
IRAQI NATIONAL ELECTIONS
I congratulate all the people of Iraq who participated in national elections today and over the past three days. There is
no better rebuke to the violent extremists who seek to derail Iraq's progress. Our thoughts and prayers are with the
families who lost friends and loved ones, and we salute the determination of the Iraqi people to reaffirm their
commitment to democracy and to charting their own future free of fear and intimidation.
Thanks to the efforts of the Iraq High Electoral Commission and the Iraqi Security Forces, which organized the voting and
ensured security at thousands of polling sites throughout the country, Iraqi men and women from all parts of the
country were able to go to the polls and choose their leaders freely.
I also would like to commend Ambassador Hill, General Odierno and all the U.S. civilian and military personnel who
supported this historic effort.
Iraqis have chosen a new government to lead their country at a critical time. In the coming months, we will work
together with Iraqi leaders as our partnership continues its transition to a primarily civilian focus, with the goal of
building a long-term, multidimensional relationship between our two nations - a relationship that will contribute to
stability in the Middle East and growing peace and prosperity in Iraq.
###"
87;Hope you have a great weekend.
87;FY1
87;Coming soon.
87;Whenever you like. What works? I can have ops reach out and build.
87;"FYI, see below. I will send the Guardian article in a moment.
Look forward to discussing."
87;"US Congress warns Cameron over danger of failed
Ulster police deal
Yes vote on Hillsborough agreement would see policing and criminal justice powers devolved to Belfast next
month
David Cameron has been given a stark warning from Washington that dissident terrorists will be ""emboldened""
to intensify their attacks in Northern Ireland and millions of dollars of US investment will be threatened if he
fails to persuade the Tories' Ulster Unionist partners to endorse the final stage of the peace process.
In a sign of deep unease in Washington at the Tories' electoral pact with the UUP, a bipartisan group of US
Congress members have demanded Cameron must ""aggressively"" encourage his partners to endorse the deal in
a vote in the Northern Ireland assembly on Tuesday.
""At this defining moment in the peace process, it is crucial that all the political parties speak with one voice
about their shared future,"" the members of Congress wrote in a private letter to Cameron.
Without a unanimous vote, they said, the province's elected officials would be sending the wrong message to
the people they represent, and to the world.
""Dissidents are trying to destabilise the political institutions and turn the clock back ... These dissidents will
continue to be emboldened if they sense there is no political unanimity on the way forward ... The challenge of
bringing good jobs to Northern Ireland will be made more difficult if potential investors do not believe there is
political stability.""
The letter by congressional leaders of the 41 million-strong Irish-American community has been passed to the
Guardian before the crucial vote on last month's Hillsborough agreement between Sinn Fein and the Democratic
Unionists.
A yes vote would see policing and criminal justice powers devolved to Belfast next month in what the British
government has dubbed the final piece in the jigsaw of the 1998 Good Friday agreement.
The congressmen and women, whose views reflect the private misgivings of the US secretary of state, Hillary
Clinton, wrote to Cameron after learning that his electoral partners in Northern Ireland were voicing doubts
about endorsing the deal. Clinton is said to be alarmed that Cameron has either failed, or not bothered, to warn
the UUP of the dangers of obstructing the deal.
A Tory source said: ""David Cameron has consistently made clear that we support the devolution of policing and
criminal justice powers ... We welcomed the agreement between the DUP and Sinn Fein. The final details are
for the parties in the executive, working as a four-party coalition, to decide. We hope that between now and
Tuesday any outstanding issues can be solved.""
The Hillsborough agreement was brokered last month under a system endorsed by the UUP when it was the
largest party in Northern Ireland. This says that any change must have the consent of 50% of both the nationalist
and Unionist communities and 50% of the assembly.
Sir Reg Empey, the UUP leader who was one of the architects of the Good Friday agreement, will meet his
party's executive tomorrow night to decide how to vote.
The deal could still be passed tomorrow without the support of the UUP because the DUP's 36 assembly
members account for more than 50% of the unionist bloc. But there are fears in Washington that a no vote from
the UUP, seen as a moribund force until Cameron breathed new life into it, would destabilise many members of
the DUP and undermine support for the devolution of policing and criminal justice powers."
87;Jon should've printed new draft about 30 mins ago.
87;"1.4(D)
B1
03/08/2020"
87;FYI
87;FYI
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivanii@state.gov>
Tuesday, March 9, 2010 7:40 AM
H
Re: Libya
B5
I was thinking the same thing after Jeff's latest missive last night."
87;Roger
87;"Have you seen this story? I look forward to discussing.
Gates Says U.S. Lacks Strategy to Curb Iran's Nuclear Drive
By DAVID E. SANGER and THOM SHANKER
Published: April 18, 2010
WASHINGTON - Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates has warned in a secret three-page memorandum to top White
House officials that the United States does not have an effective long-range policy for dealing with Iran's steady progress
toward nuclear capability, according to government officials familiar with the document.
Several officials said the highly classified analysis, written in January to President Obama's national security adviser, Gen.
James L. Jones, touched off an intense effort inside the Pentagon, the White House and the intelligence agencies to
develop new options for Mr. Obama. They include a revised set of military alternatives, still under development, to be
considered should diplomacy and sanctions fail to force Iran to change course.
Officials familiar with the memo's contents would describe only portions dealing with strategy and policy, and not
sections that apparently dealt with secret operations against Iran, or how to deal with Persian Gulf allies.
One senior official, who like others spoke on the condition of anonymity because of the sensitive nature of the memo,
described the document as ""a wake-up call."" But White House officials dispute that view, insisting that for 15 months
they had been conducting detailed planning for many possible outcomes regarding Iran's nuclear program.
In an interview on Friday, General Jones declined to speak about the memorandum. But he said: ""On Iran, we are doing
what we said we were going to do. The fact that we don't announce publicly our entire strategy for the world to see
doesn't mean we don't have a strategy that anticipates the full range of contingencies - we do.""
But in his memo, Mr. Gates wrote of a variety of concerns, including the absence of an effective strategy should Iran
choose the course that many government and outside analysts consider likely: Iran could assemble all the major parts it
needs for a nuclear weapon - fuel, designs and detonators - but stop just short of assembling a fully operational weapon.
In that case, Iran could remain a signatory of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty while becoming what strategists call a
""virtual"" nuclear weapons state.
According to several officials, the memorandum also calls for new thinking about how the United States might contain
Iran's power if it decided to produce a weapon, and how to deal with the possibility that fuel or weapons could be
obtained by one of the terrorist groups Iran has supported, which officials said they considered to be a less-likely
possibility.
Mr. Gates has never mentioned the memo in public. His spokesman, Geoff Morrell, declined comment on specifics in the
document, but issued a statement on Saturday saying, ""The secretary believes the president and his national security
team have spent an extraordinary amount of time and effort considering and preparing for the full range of
contingencies with respect to Iran.""
Pressed on the administration's ambiguous phrases until now about how close the United States was willing to allow.
Iran's program to proceed, a senior administration official described last week in somewhat clearer terms that there was
a line Iran would not be permitted to cross.
The official said that the United States would ensure that Iran would not ""acquire a nuclear capability,"" a step Tehran
could get to well before it developed a sophisticated weapon. ""That includes the ability to have a breakout,"" he said,
using the term nuclear specialists apply to a country that suddenly renounces the nonproliferation treaty and uses its
technology to build a small arsenal.
Nearly two weeks ago, Mr. Obama, in an interview with The New York Times, was asked about whether he saw a
difference between a nuclear-capable Iran and one that had a fully developed weapon. ""I'm not going to parse that right
now,"" he said. But he noted that North Korea was considered a nuclear-capable state until it threw out inspectors and,
as he said, ""became a self-professed nuclear state.""
Mr. Gates has alluded to his concern that intelligence agencies might miss signals that Iran was taking the final steps
toward producing a weapon. Last Sunday on the NBC News program ""Meet the Press,"" he said: ""If their policy is to go to
the threshold but not assemble a nuclear weapon, how do you tell that they have not assembled? I don't actually know
how you would verify that."" But he cautioned that Iran had run into production difficulties, and he said, ""It's going slow -
slower than they anticipated, but they are moving in that direction.""
Mr. Gates has taken a crucial role in formulating the administration's strategy, and he has been known over his career to
issue stark warnings against the possibility of strategic surprise.
Some officials said his memo should be viewed in that light: as a warning to a relatively new president that the United
States was not adequately prepared.
He wrote the memo after Iran had let pass a 2009 deadline set by Mr. Obama to respond to his offers of diplomatic
engagement.
Both that process and efforts to bring new sanctions against Iran have struggled. Administration officials had hoped that
the revelation by Mr. Obama in September that Iran was building a new uranium enrichment plant inside a mountain
near Qum would galvanize other nations against Iran, but the reaction was muted. The next three months were spent in
what proved to be fruitless diplomatic talks with Iran over a plan to swap much of its low-enriched uranium for fuel for a
medical reactor in Tehran. By the time Mr. Gates wrote his memo, those negotiations had collapsed.
Mr. Gates's memo appears to reflect concerns in the upper echelons of the Pentagon and the military that the White
House did not have a well-prepared series of alternatives in place in case all the diplomatic steps finally failed. In fact,
just before Mr. Gates issued his warning, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Adm. Mike Mullen, wrote an official
""chairman's guidance"" to his staff saying that while any military option would have ""limited results"" against Iran's
nuclear facilities, preparations needed to be stepped up.
""Should the president call for military options, we must have them ready,"" the admiral wrote.
Administration officials testifying before a Senate committee last week made it clear that those preparations were under
way. So did General Jones. ""The president has made it clear from the beginning of this administration that we need to be
prepared for every possible contingency,"" he said in the interview. ""That is what we have done from day one, while
successfully building a coalition of nations to isolate Iran and pressure it to live up to its obligations.""
At the same hearing before the Senate Armed Services Committee, Lt. Gen. Ronald L. Burgess Jr., director of the Defense
Intelligence Agency, and Gen. James E. Cartwright, the vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and one of the military's
most experienced officers on nuclear matters, said that Iran could produce bomb-grade fuel for at least one nuclear
weapon within a year, but that it would probably need two to five years to manufacture a workable atomic bomb.
The administration has been stepping up efforts to contain the influence of Iran and counter its missiles, including
placing Patriot anti-missile batteries, mostly"
87;Roger.
87;FYI
87;FYI.
87;Fyi. This resolves - in some respects - the UN mandate issue Lavrov raised.
87;Permit me an unsolicited observation on the Bosnia issue.
87;FYI. Israelis spinning up a storm, starting with plane briefing on the way over.
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Thursday, April 22, 2010 6:09 PM
H; Mills, Cheryl D
Re: To Cheryl Mills: Rep. McGovern Letter to President Obama, DHS Secretary
Napolitano and Secretary of State Clinton
Craig and I have discussed the state sponsor of terror issue a couple of times
Let me follow up with him."
87;Fyi
87;Fyi. Good news!
87;Arabs gave green light. More later.
87;fyi
87;"Can we put out the below?
Draft S Statement on the Hikers
I was pleased to learn of the consular visit yesterday by the Swiss Ambassador in Iran to the three detained American
hikers, Shane Bauer, Josh Fattal, and Sarah Shourd. But we are disturbed by the families' reports of their children's
physical and emotional health. These three Americans -- innocent tourists in Iraq's Kurdistan region when they were
detained on July 31, 2009 -- have been unjustly held for almost nine months without formal charges or access to legal
representation. We ask the Islamic Republic of Iran to release these three Americans and allow them to go home and be
reunited with their families.
###"
87;We did. I sent this to you at Goose Bay.
87;"Below is the article I mentioned:
U.S. Revises Tack on Mideast Arms
Washington, Egypt Discuss Plan to Rid Region of Nuclear Weapons, in Effort to Steal Iran's Thunder at U.N. Conference
By JONATHAN WEISMAN, JAY SOLOMON and JOE LAURIA
The U.S. is negotiating with Egypt a proposal to make the Middle East a region free of nuclear weapons, as the U.S. seeks
to prevent Iran from derailing a monthlong U.N. conference on nuclear nonproliferation that begins Monday.
U.S. officials familiar with the move call it an important step in assuring countries that Washington—criticized by some
for its silence about Israel's undeclared nuclear arsenal—will equitably address weapons proliferation across the region, as
Iran seeks to shift focus away from its own nuclear program.
Washington also reassured Israel it won't foist a nuclear-free zone on the region until all parties agree to it and significant
progress has been made on Mideast peace.
The U.N. conference on the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, which is held every five years, is expected to begin with a
bang Monday with an address by Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, who has condemned the West for its refusal
to disarm and for tacitly accepting Israel's nuclear capability.
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton will follow the Iranian leader in the afternoon.
The U.N. talks come at a time when Iran is believed to be heading toward a nuclear capability and the U.S. and allies have
been pressing for new, tough Security Council sanctions to curb Tehran's program.
""The Iranians are clearly intending to spoil the party,"" said a senior U.S. official involved in the nuclear diplomacy. The
official highlighted the importance of raising Mideast nuclear-free zone issues.
The designation of the region as a zone free of weapons of mass destruction was a nonbinding agreement that emerged
from a 1995 U.N. review of the Non-Proliferation Treaty, a 1970 pact to limit the spread of nuclear weapons. That 1995
agreement was pivotal because it won the indefinite extension of the treaty, but no action on the zone has been taken
since.
Senior Obama administration officials said Friday the White House is willing to significantly advance a Mideast nuclear
weapons-free zone, and would support a conference on the subject at a future date. U.S. officials said talks with Egypt
would resume in New York in the coming month. Such a zone is envisaged to include Israel, the Arab states, Iran and
Turkey.
""We've made a proposal to them [Egypt] that goes beyond what the U.S. has been willing to do before,"" said the senior
U.S. official involved in the nuclear diplomacy.
U.S. officials stressed, however, that they didn't believe that would happen without first achieving major advances in
Arab-Israeli peace talks.
""We are concerned that the conditions are not right unless all members of the region participate, which would be unlikely
unless there is a comprehensive peace plan which is accepted,"" said Ellen Tauscher, undersecretary of state for arms
control and international security. She said the U.S. has also discussed the zone with the Arab League and other members
of the Nonaligned Movement.
The diplomacy could raise new tensions between President Barack Obama and Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu if Washington is seen backing away from its commitment to Israel. Israel has voiced concerns that the U.N.
conference could turn into an international forum to corner Israel. Mr. Netanyahu backed out of a nuclear-security
conference in Washington in March due to such concerns.
An Israeli official said Friday that his government supports a Middle East freeze of WMD and nuclear weapons, but that
""it should be the culmination of a process that begins with bilateral and individual peace agreements between all the
countries in the region.""
The U.S. and Israel have been locked in a monthslong spat over Mr. Obama's calls for a complete freeze in building new
Jewish housing in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. U.S. officials have grown increasingly confident in recent days that
ties between the U.S. and Israel have stabilized. Mrs. Clinton said Friday that the Mideast peace process will get on track
next week, though not the U.S.-brokered direct talks involving Israeli and Palestinians that the Obama administration
wants to see.
Egypt's latest proposal calls for Israel's disarmament ""as soon as possible."" It also called for Israel's nuclear program to be
placed under the auspices of the International Atomic Energy Agency, the U.N.'s atomic watchdog. That proposal won't
be accepted, U.S. officials said.
The Egyptian working paper demands NPT signatory states release ""all information available to them on the nature and
scope of Israeli nuclear facilities and activities, including information pertaining to previous nuclear transfers to Israel.""
U.S. officials indicated no such demands could be made on Israel.
Arms-control analysts familiar with the talks say the U.S. is likely to propose creating a U.N. envoy given the task of
calling a conference of Middle East nations to press forward on the nuclear weapon-free zone.
""They are desperate to buy off Egyptian objections,"" said Henry Sokolski, executive director of the Non-Proliferation
Education Center and a critic of the Obama administration's arms-control approach.
Daryl Kimball, executive director of the Arms Control Association, an advocacy group, said the U.S. acceptance of a
special envoy is a significant shift. A U.S. official refused to say whether the envoy proposal, first floated by Russia, was
part of the U.S. offer.
The last NPT conference in 2005 ended in collapse. But U.S. officials said they have been laying the groundwork for this
conference for nearly a year.
The White House wants rules to ensure that a country that withdraws from the treaty doesn't escape inspections and
sanctions. They also want more power for U.N. inspectors and more backing for multinational facilities that could help
nations develop peaceful nuclear power.
Write to Jonathan Weisman at jonathan.weisman@wsj.com, Jay Solomon at jay.solomon@wsj.com and Joe Lauria at
newseditor@wsj.com"
87;"We've oot a 13Ian
Ellen will pass on details early next week."
87;Agreed. That's being worked too.
87;"1.4(D)
Fyi
1.4(D) — Declassify on: 04/23/2035"
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivanil@state.gov>
Saturday, April 24, 2010 7:53 PM
Re: Amano B1
1.4(D)
Yep --they've been distributed.
Scheland, Mark B6
1.4(D)
B1"
87;Fyi
87;"The word from Ramallah is quite positive. IF there are no announcements this week, we anticipate that the Arab League
Follow-up Committee will give its blessing on May 1 and Sen Mitchell can return to the region to start talking substance.
Given the Israelis' warning, this is a real If.
Karl/Frank will go in today to walk Karzai through the particulars of the visit - the only thorny part is that it has dropped
from 4 to 3 days. But it has all the same elements, plus a dinner with Biden.
Did you see reports that Iran has dropped out of the running for the UNSC? Trying to confirm.
Andrew S. will be sending you a long memo that responds to DOD's pooling proposals - it conveys a desire to work
together with DOD on this and offers some alternative ideas. He also canvassed the building on other topics and will
send a list up for your book tonight. He and I agreed that the list should just be for reference and that your approach of
having informal conversation on the big topics is the right one.
You saw CDM's email about the Sudan ad. Ben emailed yesterday to say he wants to talk Sudan comms strategy going
forward. Hopefully I'll reach him today. I know CDM is talking to Denis."
87;"FYI
http://thecable.foreignpolicy.com/posts/2010/03/10/lugar no more money for development banks until reform
Lugar: No more money for development banks until reform
Posted By Josh Rogin Wednesday, March 10, 2010
In the wake of the global financial crisis, a slew of multinational development banks are asking for large amounts of new
capital to both replenish and in some cases expand their resource pools, and much of the burden will fall on the United
States.
This creates a unique opportunity for the Obama administration to press these organizations to implement long-awaited
reforms, according to the Senate's top Republican on foreign relations, who has a big say in whether and how the
Congress doles out the funds.
""As the world struggles to emerge from the worst economic crisis since World War II, it is an appropriate time to ask
whether the [International Financial Institutions] are performing optimally and doing the jobs they should be doing,""
reads a newly released report by the staff of Sen. Richard Lugar, R-IN, ""The crisis should not be used as an excuse to win
increases that could not otherwise be justified. As the requests for capital are negotiated with the international donor
community, there is a window of opportunity for significant reform.""
The report, which is the culmination of six years of research, including half a dozen hearings when Lugar was committee
chairman, outlines several dozen recommendations for what the Obama administration, Congress, and the banks can do
to update their relevance.
""Does the world really need the IMF, World Bank, African Development Bank, Asian Development Bank, European Bank
for Reconstruction and Development, and Inter-American Development Bank today? Can they be changed to better
address our needs? How should we re-design them?"" the report asks.
""Such questions are particularly timely because nearly all the IFIs have sought, or will soon seek, major new infusions of
money from their donors, including the taxpayers of the United States.""
The Asian Development Bank has already asked the Obama administration for new funds, and the administration has
requested in its new budget $533 million in direct money and $12.8 billion in borrowing authority for the ADB.
A committee staffer told The Cable that Lugar wants to see progress on reform before he would support authorizing the
money.
""We want to make sure that before the American taxpayer puts more money in there that things are fixed,"" the staffer
said. ""It's not possible for them to do everything, but they could certainly make progress.""
The reforms the administration could press for in the short term include pressing the banks to focus more on
development goals rather than the structure and size of loans and ""work with the other donor countries to step back
and slow down the process,"" the staffer said.
Congress is also concerned that the Obama administration might not be interested in pressing for these reforms,
considering that Obama issued a signing statement in June indicating he did not feel bound to follow congressional
direction on such international negotiations.
Negotiations between several banks and the Treasury Department are ongoing. The U.S. side is led by Scott Morris,
deputy assistant secretary of the Treasury's Office of International Development Finance and Debt.
The issue will next surface at the end of March when the Inter-American Development Bank convenes its annual
meeting in Cancun.
Michael H. Fuchs
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-1709"
87;"You'll get from Derek and me tonight a short agenda with framing questions for the Iran meeting tomorrow. Derek is on
call to act as a sort of conductor and move the conversation along, if need be."
87;It should be ready for you. We'll get it on your desk.
87;Interesting.
87;Absolutely. Already working on it.
87;Have readout at your convenience.
87;"1.4(B)
1.4(D)
B1
From Johnnie,
Regards, Johnnie"
87;"B5
On the speech it mieht be 15 but not much more. Dan K-P has taken over drafting B6
He has been incorporating fine-tuning edits today. I will email you a draft shortly, which will be tweaked
Unfortunately, there is no teleprompter at the UN. B5
On your book, I understand that Huma will bring it out in the morning."
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sunday, May 2, 2010 10:44 PM
Fw: current speech
NPT Revcon TT DKP v8 5 2 10.docx
The speech is attached. Let me know if you need me to send it elsewhere to be printed."
87;
87;Pretty good stuff.
87;Huma said you were asking about the goals and purposes of the NAM lunch Monday.
87;"RELEASE IN PART
B5,B6
These Review Conferences have been held every five years for the
last four decades.
We know there are some countries who will choose not to be
constructive."
87;Attached is a memo from MeJanne, Jen, and Rachel on maternal health and abortion.
87;yes
87;"B5
B5
There is a proposed letter that should be in your weekend reading materials. Adding Huma to see if she's seen it.,
I will make sure it gets to you now.
B5"
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sunday, March 21, 2010 4:30 PM
RE: letter"
87;FYI.
87;"You should have Bob's memo on China currency, which he worked through with Bill. See below his further
elaboration:"
87;Okay -- working on that.
87;
87;"Is ready to come pick up the speech when you have it done. Just shoot him and email. I think it's really close. It's
gone out to the team again for any serious flags or omissions, but they've been warned you're line editing."
87;Also, you'll get Bibi points tonight, fresh from the road.
87;Will do.
87;Yep
87;See below. How would you like to proceed? B5
87;FYI
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ©state.gov>
Thursday, March 25, 2010 11:17 PM
H
Mills, Cheryl D
RCH"
87;Will do.
87;Yes. I will be finished going through it this morning before your meeting. Happy to discuss/report when you come in.
87;"-Does this work for you?
Statement by the Secretary
Murders in Ciudad Juarez, Mexico
Today the men and women of the Department of State are mourning the murder of three people connected to the
United States Consulate General in Ciudad Juarez, Mexico. One American consulate employee was killed along with her
husband, and the husband of a Mexican employee was also killed. I offer my deepest sympathies to the family, loved
ones and colleagues of these victims. The safety and security of our personnel and their families in Mexico and at posts
around the world is always our highest priority. I have spoken with our Ambassador in Mexico and we are working with
the Government of Mexico to do everything necessary to protect our people and to ensure that the perpetrators of
these horrendous acts are brought to justice.
These appalling assaults on members of our own State Department family are, sadly, part of a growing tragedy besetting
many communities in Mexico. They underscore the imperative of our continued commitment to work closely with the
Government of President Calderon to cripple the influence of trafficking organizations at work in Mexico. This is a
responsibility we must shoulder together, particularly in border communities where strong bonds of history, culture,
and common interest bind the Mexican and the American people closely together."
87;"A draft of the year-end report is coming your way with Huma. It definitely needs your magic touch. I've done my best to
craft something readable (and useful) in the midst of all the craziness.
Derek has read and commented. Cheryl will give her comments tomorrow. I'd be happy to circulate it to others who
you would like to have weigh in.
Look forward to discussing tomorrow."
87;
87;Yep.
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sunday, June 20, 2010 10:54 AM
H
Follow up"
87;Bill and I discussed
87;"This is what we propose to put out, with Rs putting out similar:
Today, Secretary Clinton spoke by telephone with Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov. They discussed preparations for the
upcoming June 24 summit between President Obama and President Medvedev. Secretary Clinton and Foreign Minister
Lavrov reveiwed developments in Kyrgyzstan and stressed their shared concern over the recent violence and continuing
interethnic tensions. The ministers agreed that the issue of the upcoming referendum us the sovereign decision of
Kyrgyzstan to make and agreed to encourage the authorities of Kyrgyzstan to conduct it according to international
standards with the monitoring support of OSCE and others. The ministers also discussed coordination of U.S. and
Russian humanitarian assistance and other support to Kyrgyzstan to help its authorities restore security, stability, and
reconciliation among all citizens of Kyrgyzstan."
87;Roger that.
87;Russian MFA plans to release a parallel press statement shortly and is faxing us the text.
87;"Below is a readout of Mitchell's meeting with Ashton. Recommendation is for you to
I've sent points to Huma.
David followed up with Russian envoy who hadn't heard from Lavrov, but David feels comfortable having you
B1
1.4(B)
1.4(D)
— Declassify on: 06/19/2035"
87;"Here's where things stand, from Jeffrey:
Called Davut when efforts to get Sinir failed (on plane prob). Davut confirmed substance of Jake S's comments to me,
said he Davut had one hour to get statement out to meet TU press cycle, and said Namik Tan would contact me asap
with proposed text. That said Davut then described substance of what he thought should be in it (he also was not clear
on whether it to be a joint statement, coordinated sep statements or just a TU statement that we'd OK and thus
support once out). However he did say he wanted to put in statement
We went back and forth on that and both conluded Namik and I would work out. Will get back
asap. Jim"
87;"Below is the final text of the Quartet statement, which Lavrov, Ban, and Ashton have now agreed to release *without a
call.* Sounds like your discussion with Lavrov did the trick:
The Quartet re-affirms that the current situation in Gaza, including the humanitarian and human rights situation of the
civilian population, is unsustainable, unacceptable, and not in the interests of any of those concerned. The Quartet
reiterates its call for a solution that addresses Israel's legitimate security concerns, including an end to weapons
smuggling into Gaza; promotes Palestinian unity based on the Palestine Liberation Organization commitments and the
reunification of Gaza and the West Bank under the legitimate Palestinian Authority; and ensures the unimpeded flow of
humanitarian aid, commercial goods and persons to and from Gaza, consistent with United Nations Security Council
resolution 1860 (2009). The Quartet declares its readiness to work closely with Israel, the Palestinian Government and
international donors in order to achieve sustainable economic development on the basis of the full implementation of
the Agreement on Access and Movement of 2005 and in the broader perspective of the two-state solution.
Consistent with these objectives, the Quartet and the Quartet Representative have worked with Israel, as well as
consulting the Palestinian Authority, Egypt, and other concerned parties, to effect a fundamental change in policy in
Gaza. The new policy towards Gaza just announced by the Government of Israel is a welcome development. The Quartet
notes that the elaboration of further details and modalities of implementation will be important in ensuring the
effectiveness of the new policy. Full and effective implementation will comprise a significant shift in strategy towards
meeting the needs of Gaza's population for humanitarian and commercial goods, civilian reconstruction and
infrastructure, and legitimate economic activity as well as the security needs of Israel. The Quartet will continue to work
with Israel, the Palestinian Authority, and other concerned parties to ensure these arrangements are implemented as
quickly as possible. The Quartet affirms that much work remains to achieve fully the solution stated above, and, in
consultation with the concerned parties, it will monitor closely the implementation of the policy in all its aspects. It will
actively explore additional ways to improve the situation in Gaza, encourage involvement of the PA at the crossings and
promote greater commerce between the West Bank and Gaza.
The Quartet stresses the importance of United Nations and other international interventions, as well as the work of local
non-governmental organizations, to be expanded in Gaza to meet urgent civilian needs, and calls on all parties to fully
enable this work.
The Quartet recognizes that Israel has legitimate security concerns that must continue to be safeguarded, and believes
efforts to maintain security while enabling movement and access for Palestinian people and goods are critical. The
Quartet commits to work with Israel and the international community to prevent the illicit trafficking of arms and
ammunition into Gaza. It urges all those wishing to deliver goods to do so through established channels so that their
cargo can be inspected and transferred via land crossings into Gaza. The Quartet emphasizes that there is no need for
unnecessary confrontations and calls on all parties to act responsibly in meeting the needs of the people of Gaza.
The Quartet also calls for an end to the deplorable detention of Gilad Shalit in advance of the fourth anniversary of his
capture on June 25; it further condemns the violation of Hamas' international obligation to provide him access by the
International Committee of the Red Cross and demands that Hamas immediately remedy the situation.
The Quartet also reiterates its support for proximity talks toward the resumption, without pre-conditions, of direct
bilateral negotiations that resolve all final status issues as previously agreed by the parties. The Quartet believes these
negotiations should lead to a settlement, negotiated between the parties within 24 months, that ends the occupation
which began in 1967 and results in the emergence of an independent, democratic, and viable Palestinian state in the
West Bank and Gaza, living side by side in peace and security with Israel and its other neighbours."
87;Will follow up.
87;"Here's a basic summary:
It focused on citing the illegitimacy of US nuclear and nonproliferation policy, and on highlighting that it is the nuclear
weapons states which are to blame for both proliferation and global instability. The speech suggested that US
nonproliferation efforts are a cynical attempt to divert attention from our aim to keep nuclear weapons for ourselves
and that even things like the Nuclear Summit are nothing more than such a veil. The speech made several pointed
attacks on the USG, from the USAF's security issue a few years ago to our use of nuclear weapons in WWII (making us
""the most hated"" in history) to allegations of support for terrorism (including that only states who have and have used
nuclear weapons could support nuclear terrorism). The speech offered 11 ""proposals"", most of which were previewed
in Tehran press today. These include legally binding NSAs, suspension of IAEA membership for those who threaten with
nuclear weapons, disarming all US nuclear bases, support for a ME w/o nuclear weapons and restructure of the UNSC.
The US del walked out -- with many partners -- in response to this speech."
87;Jim concurs in the memo recommendations.
87;Fyi
87;"Below is the Iran section of the chair's statement from Trieste. There is strong language on human rights; is that what
Miliband was referring to? The language on the nuclear issue reflects where we were last summer -- still on the first
track.
Iran
We are concerned about the aftermath of Iranian Presidential elections. We fully respect the sovereignty of Iran. At the
same time, we deplore post-electoral violence, which led to the loss of lives of Iranian civilians. We express our solidarity
with those who have suffered repression while peacefully demonstrating and urge Iran to respect fundamental human
rights, including freedom of expression, as ensured by the international treaties it has ratified. The crisis should be
settled soon through democratic dialogue and peaceful means on the basis of the rule of law. We call on the Iranian
government to guarantee that the will of the Iranian people is reflected in the electoral process.
We remain committed to finding a diplomatic solution to the issue of Iran's nuclear program and support renewed
efforts to that effect, such as the readiness of the U.S. to enter into direct talks and the invitation from China, France,
Germany, Russia, the United Kingdom and the United States to Iran to restart negotiations, as well as the constructive
involvement of other G8 partners in the process. We stress the need for unity of action on the basis of agreed policy. We
sincerely hope that Iran will seize this opportunity to give diplomacy a chance to find a negotiated solution to the
nuclear issue. At the same time we remain deeply concerned over proliferation risks posed by Iran's nuclear programme.
We recognise that Iran has the right to a civilian nuclear programme, but that comes with the responsibility to restore
confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of its nuclear activities. We strongly urge Iran to cooperate fully with the
IAEA and to comply with the relevant UNSC Resolutions.
Our meeting on the margin of the United Nations General Assembly opening week next September, will be an occasion
for the G8 to take stock of the situation."
87;"I haven't seen anything real in our press.
Original 'Message"
87;"Morales blasted the U.S. efforts in Haiti today. See below. Craig Kelly and I agree that you should consider a call to
Morales. Perhaps we could discuss tomorrow."
87;It's on its way with the book but someone will fax now.
87;Sorry - first I've heard of it. Philippe and I are sitting on the shuttle which takes off at 6. I'll catch up w Cheryl after.
87;
87;Meant to write that Solomon is a tough critic.
87;Added here.
87;On the phone with Bader,
87;"little has changed in substance or language.
Still working on it, though."
87;You'll have a new draft when you wake up. I think it's getting close but can use one more pass from you.
87;"Team would like to release following statement. Okay by you?
MEDIA NOTE
Joint Statement on the Upcoming Sudan National Elections
Following is the text of a joint statement by U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, Norwegian Foreign Minister Jonas
Store, and United Kingdom Foreign Secretary David Miliband on the upcoming national elections in Sudan.
Begin Text:
National elections in Sudan this month will represent a major milestone in the Comprehensive Peace Agreement that
ended Sudan's twenty-two year civil war, and are an important opportunity for the people of Sudan to participate in the
political process.
We urge all parties in Sudan to work urgently to ensure that elections can proceed peacefully and credibly in April. We
are deeply concerned by reports of continued administrative and logistical challenges, as well as restrictions on political
freedoms. We call on the Government of Sudan, the National Elections Commission, and all political parties to engage in
further dialogue to resolve practical obstacles, procedural impediments, and address allegations of intimidation,
harassment, and safety concerns, and other legitimate concerns raised by various political parties. We continue to urge
the parties to improve conditions on the ground in Darfur and create a secure environment conducive to Darfuri
participation.
Irrespective of the outcome of elections, it is essential that work continues and is accelerated to meet remaining CPA
deadlines. Progress is needed urgently to complete border demarcation, to establish the commissions that will
supervise the referenda for the South and Abyei, to conduct popular consultations in Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan,
and to negotiate sustainable post-CPA arrangements in areas such as wealth-sharing, citizenship and assets, and
liabilities.
We reiterate our commitment to ensure that the referenda must happen on schedule and that their outcomes need to
be respected. It is time to redouble efforts to achieve these ends. We urge all parties in Sudan and all regional and
international partners to work together to achieve the peaceful future that the people of Sudan deserve."
87;"I did. I had been told it was a wet kiss to the NSC. It wasn't. You and Gates look good.
What did you think?"
87;This is further background on the Mashabane call,
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Thursday, January 21, 2010 7:52 AM
H
Re: speech"
87;Fyi
87;Yep
87;"FYI we are putting out the following statement.
STATEMENT BY SECRETARY CLINTON
Bombing of the Shrine of Syed Ali Hujviri in Lahore
I was shocked and saddened by yesterday's attack on one of Pakistan's most popular places of worship, the Shrine of
Syed All Hujviri (Data Ganjbakhsh) in Lahore, which claimed the lives of many innocent Pakistanis.
The extremists have shown that they respect neither human dignity nor the fundamental religious values of Pakistani
society. Violating the sanctity of this revered shrine is a particularly sinister attempt to destabilize Pakistan and to
intimidate its people. The attackers will not succeed, as the Pakistani public refuses to be cowed by such violence.
We condemn this brutal crime and reaffirm our commitment to support the Pakistani people in their efforts to defend
their democracy from the violent extremists who seek to destroy it. Our thoughts and prayers are with the families of
the victims and with all the people of Pakistan.
###"
87;FYI. I'm following up with Kurt to get his thoughts.
87;
87;"And also pls pass the salt
Thx"
87;Froman has encouraged this call. I will also check in with Bader.
87;"Steve Mull is proposing that you do a conference call with the E3 FMs and Ashton sometime this week. Here is the
rationale and background:
The European Union Foreign Affairs Council, comprised of all 27 EU Foreign Ministers, will next meet on May 10. In a
conversation April 26, Bill Burns persuaded the E3 and European Commission to support adding to the agenda of that
meeting a discussion of preparations for the sanctions the EU will impose following passage of a UNSCR.
The European Council, comprised of the EU's heads of government, will meet on June 16-17 — a meeting which could
direct the imposition of such sanctions if we succeed in passing an UNSCR by then.
The purpose of your teleconference would be to hear from the E3 and Ashton a status report on the EU's preparations
to impose such sanctions, and to discuss how the U.S. could best support the EU's forward progress. It would
supplement experts' level consultations we have been conducting for several weeks, including meetings on May 3 and
May 6.
The measures the Europeans are considering include bans on new Iranian bank branches in the EU, correspondent
banking relationships, new investment in the Iranian energy sector, and on access for Iranian ships to European ports."
87;"They're still not as good as the DPRK at these barbs.
Amb Zhou saw Kurt and Jeff yesterday. Will download."
87;"FYI.
Still gathering info"
87;"Matt passed along the following barebones intel from Lute and Samantha on
groping through the clark on this search):
(he made clear that everyone is
Will let you know if I learn more."
87;"I spoke with Arturo this morning about the delegation to Honduras.
They are proposing one of two alternatives: (1) Arturo, Jose F, Craig, and Dan R. or"
87;Roger.
87;
87;Fyi - happy to give more context.
87;I will follow up on this today.
87;"Lowey
FYI."
87;"Below and attached is a proposed draft for a speech next Thursday at CFR. You'll recall that we discussed this with you
at the last speech meeting. The idea is to give a speech one year after your last CFR address that updates and amplifies
the frame you outlined, and fills it in with the work of the past year. The speech will also underscore the continuity
between your speech and the National Security Strategy.
The below draft still needs a good bit of work, but we have between now and next Thursday to get it into shape. AMS
was initially skeptical, but I think she believes the speech is heading in the right direction (she'll write you with specific
comments ... I have my own suggestions for further improvement) and that on balance it should be given. Derek is a
strong proponent of the speech, and Jim, who has not read a draft, embraced the concept.
***DRAFT***
SECRETARY OF STATE HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON REMARKS AT COUNCIL ON FOREIGN RELATIONS WASHINGTON, DC
JULY 15, 2010
B5
B5
B5
B5
B
-
Thank you.
###"
87;Are you up for that given your other demands?
87;FYI. We are revising call sheet for call to Karzai - potentially Sunday.
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Saturday, July 10, 2010 3:24 PM
Re: Your Phone Call to President Karzai
1.4(D)
B1
Pakistanis will go to Kabul just before the conference to try to bring it home. Checking with Holbrooke to see what is
necessary on Pakistani side."
87;Fyi - we are putting out the following today.
87;"The gentleman you have talked to Bill Burns about has apparently gone to his country's interests section because he is
unhappy with how much time it has taken to facilitate his departure. This could lead to problematic news stories in the
next 24 hours. Will keep you posted."
87;Bill will be at prebrief, then has speech on India. Still checking with Jim.
87;"FYI:
USIBC Launches New Education Initiative to Strengthen K-12, Vocational, and Higher Education Linkages in the U.S. and
India
June 2, 2010 - Washington, DC - On the occasion of its 35th anniversary, and looking ahead to the global economy of
the future, the U.S.-India Business Council (USIBC) today announced the launch of a new initiative aimed at
strengthening institutional linkages between academia, industry and NGOs focusing on the elementary, vocational and
higher education sectors in both countries.
""The United States and India must be committed partners in building the workforce of tomorrow, a partnership that will
unleash opportunity, spur growth and sustain prosperity not just in our countries but across the global community,"" said
Harold McGraw III, incoming USIBC Chairman and Chairman, President and CEO of The McGraw-Hill Companies. ""To do
this, we must focus on strengthening our educational ties at every level. By working together our two countries can
equip the next generation with the education and skills necessary to compete and win in the global economy.""
Mr. McGraw gave the keynote address before a packed audience of over 400 U.S. and Indian business, government, and
education leaders at USIBC's 35th Anniversary Summit, entitled ""A Pivotal Period in U.S.-India Relations: Tackling
Education, Infrastructure and Inclusive Growth.""
On the eve of the first-ever U.S.-India Strategic Dialogue, India's Union Minister of External Affairs, SM Krishna, U.S.
Education Secretary Arne Duncan, India's Minister of Human Resource Development, Kapil Sibal, and India's Ambassador
to the United States, Meera Shankar, joined hundreds of top business leaders in Washington to participate in the U.S.-
India Business Council 35th anniversary deliberations.
USIBC's Education Initiative will serve as a dynamic platform for business, NGOs, and academia to provide vital input into
both the U.S. and Indian governments - such that the synergies between American and Indian business and educational
communities are unleashed.
""We can talk about strategic, defense, civil nuclear, renewable energy and every other type of commercial cooperation,
but if we do not develop the skill sets in our respective societies to sustain such collaboration, all this talk will never be
successfully converted to action,"" Ron Somers, President of the U.S.-India Business Council, noted. ""How fortunate it is
that families across all walks of life in both our societies so highly value education. We have much to learn from one
another, and much to accomplish - to prepare for the challenges of the 21st Century,"" Somers said.
The USIBC Education initiative will focus on three thrust areas:
1. Higher Education: USIBC will host the U.S.-India Higher Education Forum (HEF) at the invitation of the U.S. and
Indian governments. The HEF will serve as the premier platform to enlist academia, industry and NGOs to strengthen
linkages between U.S. and Indian educational institutions from both countries. The HEF will provide a formalized
network for industry, academia and the NGO community to provide direct policy input to the U.S. and Indian
governments in all areas of education, with an aim to facilitate greater collaboration, including the opening of India's
higher education sector.
2. Elementary K-12 Education : USIBC has embarked on a survey of rural and urban, private and public K-12 schools
throughout India to identify best practices that are working well in educating students, while assessing needs where
industry, NGOs and government may join together to fill gaps. With the support of Ryan International Group, one of
India's leading educators, both financial and intellectual resources will be mobilized to transform these and other
schools in a manner that promotes replication of successful models across India.
3. Vocational Training and Skills Development : USIBC will partner with its member-companies to feature Case
Studies of Vocational Training and Skills Development that are being implemented across India. The exercise will
attempt to enlist more corporations to participate in this important area of human capacity building. Programs helping
to train thousands of workers will generate employment opportunities and sustain economic growth now and for the
long future - in both countries.
India is embarked on expanding its community college system, including technical training institutions, as well as inviting
interest in implementing 30,000 new colleges and 1,500 universities over the next decade.
The United States continues to be the most sought after destination for Indian students studying overseas, attracting as
many as 113,000 each year to American universities and colleges. The U.S. wishes to remain a magnet for attracting the
best and the brightest from around the world by promoting institutional partnerships between U.S. based educational
institutions and new counterparts. Integral to this core knowledge infrastructure, industry must be involved in this
enterprise.
The McGraw-Hill Companies (NYSE: MHP) is a global information and education company providing knowledge, insights
and analysis in the financial, education and business information sectors through leading brands including Standard &
Poor's, McGraw-Hill Education, J.D. Power and Associates and Platts. McGraw-Hill established business operations in
India 40 years ago. Through its partnership with CRISIL, India's leading ratings, research, and risk and policy advisory
company, Standard & Poor's is helping facilitate access to capital to drive economic growth and job creation in the
country. Through its partnership with Tata, McGraw-Hill Education is delivering innovative, digital solutions to help
workers acquire the 21st century skills they need to succeed in today's global economy. India is home to McGraw-Hill's
largest employee population outside of the U.S. and is the company's fourth largest market.
The U.S.-India Business Council, formed in 1975 at the request of the Government of India and the U.S. Government to
advance commercial ties between the world's two largest free-market democracies, is hosted under the aegis of the U.S.
Chamber of Commerce. The U.S. Chamber of Commerce is the world's largest business federation representing more
than 3 million businesses and organizations of every size, sector, and region. The U.S.-India Business Council celebrates
its 35th Anniversary at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce on June 2, 2010 in Washington, D.C. For more information please
visit www.usibc.com .
www.usibc.com"
87;Fyi
87;Nothing that can't keep. Actually somewhat quiet night.
87;Will track down
87;FYI.
87;Roger - will do.
87;FYI per your question yesterday.
87;"From Landler today, middle of the piece -- not too much to it:
Israel also took issue with the Obama administration's assertion that the United States had warned Israeli
officials to exercise caution and restraint in intercepting the flotilla.
""I was not contacted by anyone in the administration about this,"" said Michael B. Oren, Israel's ambassador to
the United States. Mr. Oren said he was not aware that anybody else in the Israeli government had been called
and was seeking clarification from the administration.
A spokesman for the State Department, Philip J. Crowley, said the United States had ""extensive contacts"" with
Israel and Turkey before the flotilla set sail. ""We expressed to the Israelis the need for caution and restraint in
dealing with civilians, including American citizens,"" he said."
87;Good stuff from Medvedev
87;Fyi
87;"Most observers seem confident that tomorrow will go smoothly. Shaun has indicated that he'd like to speak with you
late morning or early afternoon. I'll check back in tomorrow am."
87;"This is from the political officer in London:
David Cameron will be given the right of reply after the PM's statement this afternoon -- followed by Q&A. UUP MP
Sylvia Hermon is likely to be ""unhelpful"" during the Q&A.
The Conservatives are becoming exasperated by the rumors that appear in the press and elsewhere that they are
unsupportive of the agreement. Our contacts say the Tories have been completely consistent in supporting the
government on devolution, though they don't believe HMG handled the issue well (i.e. allowing the exclusion of the UUP
and SDLP).
Reg Empey is scheduled to meet his MLAs tonight to review the document and prepare for the working group with
SDLP's Margaret Ritchie."
87;FYI. They want to issue as USG. Are you comfortable with that?
87;It's true you've got to consider the source...
87;"We should get you together with Jim, Jack, and Anne-Marie on the early side tomorrow, so that your guidance can be
reflected in the BCL that Anne-Marie's shop is preparing for Jim and Jack for the 5:30 DC.
For what it's worth, my overall take on the document
My other concern
\"
87;"Jim appears to be largely out-of-pocket, and it's critical that he be part of the conversation. So tomorrow might be most
productive."
87;"Just saw the email from Sid - was working on the below report. Shaun apparently had a much
more pessimistic view of what Cameron would do than all of our Parliament watchers, who felt
confident from the get-go that he would support the deal.
PM Brown praised all parties involved; stressed the need to adhere to the dates laid out in
the agreement several times; welcomed the supportive Westminster interventions during the Q
and A of SDLP Mark Durkan and DUP Peter Robinson and Nigel Dods, but pointedly expressed hope
that other parties (read UUP, whose MP was either not present or simply didn't speak) would
express their support as soon as possible.
As expected, David Cameron praised the agreement and all parties; raised the desire that all
parties (read SDLP and UUP) be given time to review the document; and pointedly asked the PM
what issues that were not expressly mentioned in the agreement would be addressed by the
Working Group -- to which Brown responded, ""all the issues outstanding from St Andrew's.""
Cameron and Brown praised the U.S. role, singling you out. Brown also twice referred to your
offer to host an investment conference.
Overall, nothing concerning from the Tories...on the contrary, full support, a request that
the minority parties have a chance to review and some questions on outstanding issues.
UUP MLAs meet tonight to review.
Note: DUP interventions were balanced.. .Dods raised parades and decommissioning as reminder
of outstanding issues, but stressed desire of all parties ""not to go back"" to the bad old
days. Minor dig at previous Sinn Fein ""threats."" Robinson stressed cooperation in the
negotiations. Struck a statesmanlike tone."
87;Phil got a readout from Ops following the call. Memcon will be done tomorrow because of the snow day.
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sunday, June 6, 2010 4:21 PM
H; Mills, Cheryl D
Huma Abedin
Re: Brief memo for Cheryl Mills on Colombia - for Secretary Clinton
We are planning to find a careful but effective way to address progress on human rights issues and continuing
challenges in your press avail. We will explain it to the Colombians and highlight it for Cindy. We can also read out your
meetings to her."
87;FYI.
87;"Here is an assessment from EUR:
Re: s comments on Romania/Moldova
1.4(B)
1.4(D)
In
E31
2006, he said, ""We are the only country, the only people, which remain still divided. Germany reunited its
nation; Romania remains still divided into two countries. But, I repeat, our reunification will occur inside of the
European Union and in no other way."" In 2009, he said ""Who can imagine that a head of Romanian state will
sign a treaty to entrench the Molotov-von Ribbentrop Pact?""
During his late January trip to Chisinau, Basescu's message on territorial integrity and supportive of
EU integration. He said ""Romania recognized the state borders of the Republic of Moldova inherited from the
former Soviet Union. Romania agrees to sign an agreement in regards to the existent border regime, the way it
was inherited from the USSR."" Romania and Moldova, in fact, have good relations and no real border issues;
the two governments are working on an agreement to make cross-border travel easier for Moldovans.
The biggest challenge to Moldova's territorial integrity is Transnistria, where de facto authorities rely on the
long-term presence of Russian forces for political support. Moldova's leaders seek a transition to a multilateral
presence and withdrawal of Russian troops, but this is not likely without a political settlement on Transnistria's
reintegration. Moldovan and Transnistrian authorities are pursuing quiet confidence building measures and
(Russia, Moldova, Ukraine, Transnistria and the OSCE are the 5
parties and the US and EU are the 2 observers), but
— Reason: 1.4(B), 1.4(D) — Declassify on: 02/09/2030"
87;"From EUR:
Update on Ukraine Election Situation
With over 99.9 percent of the vote in Ukraine counted, Yanukovych leads by 3.5 percent
(almost 900,000 votes) and is the clear winner and next president. The Central Election
Commission should complete its vote tabulation today and must certify the results within ten
days; certification is expected as early as Friday. Tymoshenko, who has been silent publicly,
plans to bring cases of alleged electoral fraud to the courts, but they will not change the
result. Tymoshenko claims that she intends to work within the law and not to incite street
protests.
Our recommendation is
EU Ambassadors in Kiev
have recommended the same approach to Brussels, but want to revisit it if there is no progress
by Friday. Medvedev called Yanukovych today with praise for the conduct of elections, but
stopped short of congratulating him on his victory.
Following certification of the election, Tymoshenko is likely to appeal within the legal five-day
period. This will likely push back an inauguration date until early March."
87;"Phil believes he has nailed down where things are on Belarus. Note is coming your way spelling out state of play and
proposing a cable, which they will prepare."
87;Fyi
87;"FYI:
Brazilian FM defends dialogue with Iran
BRASILIA, Feb. 9 (Xinhua) -- Brazilian Foreign Minister Celso Amorim said Tuesday Brazil would maintain negotiations
with Iran on uranium enrichment and oppose any sanctions against Iran.
Amorim said Brazil was against the production of nuclear weapons, but Iran had the right to carry out a peaceful nuclear
program.
""Dialogue is still possible. What we want is to make sure (that the uranium will not be used to make weapons) through
peaceful ways and dialogue,"" Amorim told reporters.
Under a draft deal brokered by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the UN nuclear watchdog, most of Iran's
existing low-grade enriched uranium should be shipped to Russia and France, where it would be processed into fuel rods
with a purity of 20 percent.
Iran declared on Tuesday it had started the process of producing 20-percent enriched uranium inside the country.
In response to Iran's announcement, the U.S.-led Western countries have warned to take political and economic
sanctions against Iran.
For his part, Amorim said he considered any kind of sanctions ineffective and dangerous because they might cross a limit
and jeopardize peace.
Iran's president made an official visit to Brazil in November, during which the Brazilian government defended Iran's right
to have its own peaceful nuclear program including uranium enrichment similar to Brazil's, following international
standards."
87;"See below from Tom. We can put together a conference call at your convenience with Arturo, Craig, Carmen, CDM, me,
and perhaps Jim.
On the Mitchell material, for reasons that elude me, the two versions of the Blair statement were done on the classified
system. Ops will get the statement and the other document to you ASAP. I've also asked them to convert the statement
so that it can be emailed to you."
87;"Trust me, I share your exasperation. But until ops converts it to the unclassified email system, there is no physical way
for me to email it. I can't even access it."
87;"The first has Mitchell's edits, the second is original from Blair's guy to Mara:
Draft Statement by the Secretary as Revised by Senator Mitchell
Original Draft Statement by the Secretary Submitted by Tony Blair
The United States is determined to bring about a two-state solution. Believes there is a strong basis for doing
so. Believes it can be done by combining a renewed political negotiation with change on the ground, bottom up, as set
out in Prime Minister Fayyad's plan for a Palestinian state.
To this end,,Tony Blair, as Quartet Representative, will work in partnership with Senator Mitchell to support the political
negotiation by mobilizing the efforts of the international community: (1) to build support for the institutional capacity
and future governance of a future Palestinian state; (2) to improve freedom of movement and access for Palestinians;
(3) to encourage further private sector investment; and (4) to bring change in the living conditions of the people in Gaza."
87;
87;More from Tom.
87;"1.4(B)
1.4(D)
B1
B5
I called Bill about that this morning when I saw the stories.
In short, he thinks this is all playing out in Moscow, not in Geneva."
87;Troubling news from Europe.
87;
87;B5
87;Fyi
87;I
87;"Are you okay w the below?
Go U.S.!"
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Saturday, June 12, 2010 11:45 AM
Re: Pls Clear: Anniversary of Iran's Disputed Presidential Election"
87;"Word is that we're going to announce our response to the Israeli flotilla investigation today. Did Jones or Ross speak
with you about it?"
87;Fyi. I think this call makes sense.
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Monday, June 21, 2010 9:42 PM
Fw: McChrystal in Rolling Stone
R1109McChrystal.pdf
Attached is the doc, in pdf. I will have it faxed to your house.
It's for the NEXT issue of Rolling Stone but AP has a copy. We'll need
Some choice quotes below."
87;Roger
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sunday, June 13, 2010 10:51 AM
Abedin, Huma
Re: S-Saudabayev call
Will keep you posted."
87;"From John Beyerle ... Perhaps the Russians won't send troops:
I just called Karasin. He agreed that the situation had gotten worse in Osh and Jalalabad today but said the Russian
position is still that sending in foreign troops, whether Russian or CSTO, will be counterproductive and lead to more
violence and bloodshed.
The IL-76s that flew in to Kant today were the EMERCOM/M4C planes he told me about yesterday; they have
humanitarian cargo, primarily doctors and medical equipment. I cited the news reports that a battalion of paratroopers
had gone in -- he said there may be some troops on board to guard the plane or beef up security at Kant, but he was
firm that at this point Russia has no plans to introduce its own forces in the south. The main objective was to stop the
violence through peaceful means; Russia had provided the Kyrgyz forces with additional ""technical means"" for
accomplishing that. He said they hoped this would help Kyrgyz forces get control of the situation, which was their main
goal.
I asked about CSTO planning, and possible UN or OSCE PKFs. He said there is no formal CSTO meeting planned,
although people are consulting via phone. He repeated their hesitation to see any CSTO deployments. They have not
yet considered UN or OSCE PKFs, but if the situation continues to deteriorate, he wouldn't exclude the possibility.
Rushailo is currently in Moscow, but may be sent to Bishkek tomorrow or Tuesday. He agreed to call me if there is any
major change in the situation on the ground, or regarding force deployments. Tomorrow is a Russian holiday but he'll
have his cell phone on."
87;I can talk tonight - whenever is convenient for you.
87;Sure could, if it works for you.
87;"I talked to CDM about doing some strategy sessions this week. We discussed trying to do three:
There are obviously a dozen different ways to do this, and a dozen different configurations. So consider this a strawman
- we're eager to hear your reactions."
87;Talked to Ben. Much to report.
87;"Below is McC's statement and some early articles:
McC Statement:
I extend my sincerest apology for this profile. It was a mistake
reflecting poor judgment and should never have happened.
Throughout my career, I have lived by the principles of personal honor
and professional integrity. What is reflected in this article falls far
short of that standard.
I have enormous respect and admiration for President Obama and his
national security team, and for the civilian leaders and troops fighting
this war and I remain committed to ensuring its successful outcome.
Aides to U.S. general in Afghanistan slam Obama:
report
20 mins ago
WASHINGTON (Reuters) — Aides to the top U.S. general in Afghanistan insulted some of President Barack Obama's closest advisers,
calling one a ""clown"" and another a ""wounded animal,"" in an article to be published Friday in Rolling Stone magazine.
The article also quotes an aide describing the commander of U.S. and NATO forces in Afghanistan General Stanley McChrystal's
""disappointment"" with his initial one-on-one meeting with Obama last year.
Quoting all the McChrystal aides anonymously, the article portrays a split between the U.S. military and Obama's advisers at an
extremely sensitive moment for the Pentagon, which is fending off criticism of its strategy to turn around the nearly nine-year-old
Afghan war.
The Pentagon had no immediate comment about the article, which has been brought to the attention of senior officials.
It quotes a member of McChrystal's team making jokes about Vice President Joe Biden, who was seen as critical of the general's
efforts to escalate the conflict and who had favored a more limited counter-terrorism approach.
""Biden?"" the aide was quoted as saying. ""Did you say: Bite me?""
Another aide called White House National Security Adviser Jim Jones, a retired four star general, a ""clown"" who was ""stuck in 1985.""
It quoted an adviser to McChrystal dismissing an early meeting with Obama as a ""10-minute photo op.""
""Obama clearly didn't know anything about him, who he was. The boss was pretty disappointed,"" the adviser told the magazine.
McChrystal, a famous workaholic said to sleep just four hours a day, was brought into Afghanistan a year ago after his predecessor
was pushed out.
The article portrays his teams as disapproving of the Obama administration, with the exception of Secretary of State Hillary Clinton,
who backed McCrystal's request for additional troops in Afghanistan.
Some of the strongest criticism was reserved for Richard Holbrooke, Obama's special envoy to Afghanistan and Pakistan.
""The boss says he's like a wounded animal,"" a member of the general's team is quoted as saying. ""Holbrooke keeps hearing rumors
that he's going to get fired, so that makes him dangerous.""
McChrystal was quoted as saying he felt ""betrayed"" by the leak of a classified cable from U.S. Ambassador to Afghanistan Karl
Eikenberry last year. The cable raised doubts about sending more troops to shore up an Afghan government already lacking in
credibility.
""I like Karl, I've known him for years, but they'd never said anything like that to us before,"" McChrystal was quoted as saying in the
article.
""Here's one that covers his flank for the history books. Now if we fail, they can say, 'I told you so.""
(Editing by Washington World Desk)
Copyright © 2010 Yahoo! Inc. All rights reserved.
And from the WSJ:
0 JUNE 21, 2010, 6:55 PM ET
McChrystal's Next Offensive?
Relations between the U.S. military and civilians in the Obama administration have been tense since last year's three-month review of Afghan war strategy, a state of affairs
unlikely to be helped by a new profile of Gen. Stanley McChrystal, the overall commander in Afghanistan, that will appear in Rolling Stone magazine on Friday.
In the eight-page article, released to reporters on Monday ahead of publication, McChrystal appears to belittle Vice President Joe Biden and accuses Karl Eikenberry, the U.S.
ambassador to Kabul, of undermining his war plan within the administration.
Asked by the Rolling Stone reporter about what he now feels of the war strategy advocated by Biden last fall — fewer troops, more drone attacks — the article reports that
McChrystal and his aides attempted to come up with a good one-liner to dismiss the question. ""Are you asking about Vice President Biden?"" McChrystal reportedly jokes. ""Who's
that?""
Later in the article, McChrystal turns more serious when asked about cables sent last fall to Washington by Eikenberry. The cables called into question the major troop increase
advocated by McChrystal's team and the U.S.'s backing of Afghan President Hamid Karzai — views that the ambassador had not previously raised with McChrystal or his staff.
""I like Karl, I've known him for years, but they'd never said anything like that to us before,"" McChrystal is quoted as saying. ""Here's one that covers his flank for the history
books. Now if we fail, they can say, 'I told you so.""
The article, titled ""The Runaway General,"" has already caused nervousness inside the Pentagon, where memories are still fresh of another blistering profile that got a top
commander in hot water: an August 2008 cover story in Esquire <hop://wvav.esquire.com/features/fox-fallon > on Adm. William ""Fox"" Fallon, then commander of all U.S.
forces in the Middle East and Central Asia. The article eventually played a part in Fallon's resignation two years ago.
In that Esquire piece, however, Fallon appeared to directly contradict White House policy on Iran and other parts of the Middle East; the Rolling Stone article makes no such
allegation, but rather is full of jokey put-downs of important Washington players.
Comments in the article attributed to anonymous McChrystal aides are particularly harsh towards some senior members of the Obama administration, including National Security
Adviser James Jones, and other leading politicians, like Sens. John Kerry (D., Mass.) and John McCain (R., Ariz). They also make some unflattering references to
PresidentBarack Obama himself, saying the president didn't seem to know who McChrystal was when he appointed him to run the war early last year.
Only Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, who is portrayed as having strongly backed McChrystal's plan for Afghanistan, is singled out for praise by the anonymous McChrystal
aides.
A spokesman for McChrystal did not immediately respond to a request for comment late Monday.
Copyright 2008 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. Distribution and use of this material are governed by our Subscriber Agreement
<littp://onlinemsi.com/public/pagg/subscriber agreement.html> and by copyright law. For non-personal use or to order multiple copies, please contact Dow Jones Reprints all-
800-843-0008 or visit
www.djremints.com <htm://www.djrenrints.com>
Top US Afghan commander mocks Biden: report
(AFP) — 1 hour ago
WASHINGTON — The US commander in Afghanistan mocks the vice president and denounces a top diplomat in a magazine interview, while his aides
speak dismissively of President Barack Obama.
Tensions between General Stanley McChrystal and the White House are on full display in an unflattering profile in Rolling Stone of the commander of US
and NATO forces in the Afghan war.
McChrystal jokes sarcastically about preparing to answer a question referring to Vice President Joe Biden, known as a skeptic of the commander's war
strategy.
""Are you asking about Vice President Biden?' McChrystal says with a laugh. 'Who's that?'"" the article quotes him as saying.
""Biden?' suggests a top adviser. 'Did you say: Bite Me?""
McChrystal tells the magazine that he felt ""betrayed"" by the US ambassador to Kabul, Karl Eikenberry, in a White House debate over war strategy last year.
Referring to a leaked internal memo from Eikenberry that questioned McChrystal's request for more troops, the commander suggested the ambassador had
tried to protect himself for history's sake.
""I like Karl, I've known him for years, but they'd never said anything like that to us before,"" McChrystal tells the magazine.
""Here's one that covers his flank for the history books. Now if we fail, they can say, ?I told you so.""
Eikenberry, himself a former commander in Afghanisan, had written to the White House saying Afghan President Hamid Karzai was an unreliable partner
and that a surge of troops could draw the United States into a open-ended quagmire.
The article revisits the friction between the White House and the military last fall as Obama debated whether to grant McChrystal's request for tens of
thousands of reinforcements.
Although Obama in the end granted most of what McChrystal asked for, the strategy review was a difficult time, the general tells the magazine.
""I found that time painful,"" McChrystal says. ""I was selling an unsellable position.""
An unnamed adviser to McChrystal alleges the general came away unimpressed after a meeting with Obama in the Oval Office a year ago, just after the
president named him to take over in Afghanistan.
""It was a 10-minute photo op,"" the general's adviser says.
""Obama clearly didn?t know anything about him, who he was.., he didn?t seem very engaged.
""The boss was pretty disappointed,"" says the adviser.
The profile, titled ""The Runaway General,"" portrays his aides as profane and intensely loyal to McChrystal, while arguing the general has seized control over
the war on the military and diplomatic fronts.
The four-star general also derides the hard-charging top US envoy to the region, Richard Holbrooke, and complains about a dinner with an unnamed French
minister during a visit to Paris.
""Oh, not another e-mail from Holbrooke,"" McChrystal says, looking at his messages on a mobile phone. ""I don't even want to open it.""
In a hotel room in Paris getting ready for a dinner with a French official, McChrystal says: ""How'd I get screwed into going to this dinner?""
""The dinner comes with the position, sir,"" says his aide, Colonel Charlie Flynn.
""Hey, Charlie,"" McChrystal says, ""does this come with the position?""
McChrystal gives him the middle finger.
Copyright © 2010 AFP. All rights reserved"
87;"Oh darn it - sorry I missed your message - I was engrossed in the PSD script.
If you're still up please call."
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Wednesday, May 5, 2010 10:54 PM
Mills, Cheryl D
NY meeting
Erica flagged for me, and Bill Burns just called to confirm, that Mottaki has asked the perm reps of the Security Council
to have dinner tomorrow night.
Susan can't attend because she's here in DC but ro oses Alex Wolff attend in her lace.
You can discuss with Bill and Jim in the am, but wanted to flag."
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Wednesday, May 5, 2010 11:00 PM
Re: NY meeting"
87;"Cheryl and I discussed how to do an effective strategy session. Monday early afternoon is the first clear shot we have at
getting the right group of people in the room together for an extended period of time.
We propose to start the discussion from the following premise: We've addressed, in one fashion or another, to one
degree of satisfaction or another, most of the major items we set out at the beginning of last near. We've moved the
needle, but we haven't changed the game. Now the question is, what are the major milestones over the next 12-18
months? What should we be aiming at? And especially, what are some potential game-changers — moves that would
shift the global landscape in meaningful and long-lasting ways?
Everything will be on the table — regional issues, transnational issues, etc. Everyone should read the book of look-ahead
papers; identify things they think we should pursue; and add ideas — especially creative and far-reaching ideas — on top
of what's contained in them.
We propose the following roster:
Jim
Jack
Bill
AMS
Derek
CDM
Jake
Rich
Kurt
Judith
Harold
Let us know what you think.
Jake"
87;"Afghanistan
FYL
Statement by Ambassador Mark Sedwill, NATO's Senior Civilian Representative to Afghanistan
Stan McChrystal is one of the finest men I have ever known. He is and will remain a lifelong
friend.
General McChrystal has also been an outstanding military commander who was pivotal in
creating and driving forward NATO's strategy in Afghanistan to regain the initiative against
the insurgency, resolve the political tensions which fuel it and transition responsibility to the
Government of Afghanistan as we help build their capabilities.
This strategy remains the basis of the campaign. The campaign remains on course. The
Afghan people should have no doubt of our commitment to build a stable Afghanistan and a
safer world.
I look forward to working with General David Petraeus whose remarkable track record speaks
for itself. He will provide the continuity and strong leadership required to meet the challenges
ahead.
Dominic Medley
SCR Spokesman/Media Advisor
medlev.dominic@hq.nato.int
dominic.medlev@hq.isaf.nato.int
+93 793 38 4008"
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivann@state.gov>
Wednesday, June 23, 2010 5:06 PM
FW:
FYI on"
87;FYI
87;Fyi
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Thursday, June 17, 2010 8:42 AM
Abedin, Huma; Verma, Richard R
Gaza language"
87;"May 7, 2010 — Ben Rhodes briefing:
""We've identified July 2011 as the beginning point of a transition to an Afghan lead in certain instances.
Again, the reductions that will follow July 2011 will be based upon conditions on the ground."""
87;"Dan will stay through Monday to work
The next step would be to work toi"
87;"Below is the update I have as of yesterday - still waiting on today's update and Dan is working the language on a number
of points. I will get you the latest either late tonight or tomorrow morning.
Based on our discussions so far,
DRAFT STATEMENT
DISCUSSION
ANALYSIS
For us, there is merit"
87;Fyi
87;Attached is the PPD.
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Thursday, May 6, 2010 5:12 PM
H
Items
1. You asked about Kurt's visit to Burma. He's set to go in three days. I talked to Jim about it today,
2. You also asked about IRS assessments of tax delinquency at State.
3. Crai and the Cuba team are working something up
4."
87;FYI
87;I've asked AMS to have her team work up a nite note that we could send over tomorrow.
87;"Naomi Long (Alliance) defeated Peter Robinson for the East Belfast constituency. Huge upset. She was the mayor of
Belfast - you met her on the trip."
87;"Willy McCrea (OUP) holds seat; Reg's gamble fails. Looks unlikely UUP/Tory link-up will produce any seats.
Our team can't imagine he'll hold on as leader for long. One key commentator just said Reg is finished."
87;See below, in particular section B. That is the nub of Harold's argument.
87;"Wanted to make sure you saw this item:
Traces of gunpowder found in the wreckage of a sunken Republic of Korea naval ship have been identified as those
generated by the explosion of a torpedo, an anonymous ROK government official said. (yonhapnews.co.kr)
Also, we're still in a bit of a holding pattern on prox talks, though looking very good."
87;I have talked to him, as has Derek, but I need one more convo before you see him.
87;"Below is the actual Rice statement
USUN PRESS RELEASE #157 August
2, 2010
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
Statement by Ambassador Susan E. Rice, U.S. Permanent Representative to the United Nations, on Secretary
General Ban's Panel Concerning the May 31 Flotilla Incident
The United States welcomes today's announcement by UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon of the
establishment of a Panel regarding the incident of May 31st- We thank both governments for the constructive
and cooperative spirit they have shown and the Secretary General for his leadership and determination. The
Panel, which has the support of both Israel and Turkey, will receive and review the reports of each
government's national investigation into the incident and make recommendations as to how to avoid such
incidents in the future. This Panel is not a substitute for those national investigations. It complements them,
affording Israel and Turkey the opportunity to present the conclusions of their investigations to the international
community. The focus of the Panel is appropriately on the future and on preventing such incidents from
recurring. The United States also hopes that the Panel can serve as a vehicle to enable Israel and Turkey to
move beyond the recent strains in their relationship and repair their strong historic ties.
The United States expects that the Panel will operate in a transparent and credible manner and that its work will
be the primary method for the international community to review the incident, obviating the need for any
overlapping international inquiries. The United States welcomes the naming of the former Prime Minister of
New Zealand, Geoffrey Palmer, as Chair and the outgoing President of Colombia, Alvaro Uribe, as Vice-Chair.
We look forward to the announcement of the two additional members from Israel and Turkey.
###
This email is UNCLASSIFIED.
This email is UNCLASSIFIED."
87;Fyi
87;FYI. Will keep you posted.
87;"Sen Mitchell proposes putting out the following statement tomorrow. We would respond on specific commitments on
Ramat Shlomo if asked.
Special Envoy Mitchell left the Middle East on Sunday, where he completed the first round of proximity talks with Israeli
and Palestinian leaders. The talks were serious and wide-ranging.
Special Envoy Mitchell emphasized the importance of making progress in the proximity talks and of moving to direct
negotiations as soon as possible. We have received commitments from both sides, and we have made assurances to
both sides, that are enabling us to move forward. The full scope of these discussions will remain private.
As both parties know, if either side takes significant actions during the proximity talks that we judge would seriously
undermine trust, we will respond to hold them accountable and ensure that negotiations continue.
Special Envoy Mitchell will return to the region next week to continue indirect negotiations with the parties."
87;I think this is about right too.
87;"After further back and forth, we've come up with a way to mention Ramat Shlomo and incitement to violence that
should be acceptable to both sides. The additional paragraph would read:
We have urged the parties to help create an atmosphere that is conducive to successful talks, and they are responding,
including President Abbas' statement that he will work against incitement of any sort and Prime Minister Netanyahu's
statement that there will be no construction at the Ramat Shlomo project for two years. They are both trying to move
forward in difficult circumstances and we commend them for that."
87;I should add that this is still going back and forth.
87;Fyi
87;"You'll be getting the draft of the joint communique - with carefully haggled language on detentions - in your book
tonight. You'll also get a proposed Quartet statement on prox talks.
Happy Mothers Day!"
87;FYI — the Philippines compact was approved unanimously.
87;
87;FYI
87;"RCH talked to Lute, who said he would fix before it goes final, the whole thing is on hold thru Karzai, but we can expect
to see another version next week."
87;Agree - as do others
87;Tonight's announcement of a 700 bn euro bailout plan puts the secprez on hold, at least til we see how markets react.
87;Roger - it's in there.
87;They came to you overnight.
87;FYI — see below for update on UNFPA head selection process.
87;FYI.
87;"Jim just called to weigh in on the Dal call sheet.
More generally, he thinks it should be an upbeat call"
87;"The prez has agreed to participate if we can nail down assurance. That means a call from you to their guy Monday
(possibly Sun) and follow up by the prez."
87;Will do
87;RELEASE IN PART B5,B6
87;Will do
87;"As I mentioned in an email yesterday, the team is proposing that you call Bibi on Monday afternoon. We can set it up if
you give the green light."
87;Fyi
87;"+ Philippe
We believe you should go on camera tomorrow.
We have been working the written statement overnight and will put it out shortly."
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ©state.gov>
Sunday, August 8, 2010 1:46 PM
Fw: UNFPA - additional information
Below is further info on the three UNFPA names."
87;"I remember what I was going to say earlier — you might check in with Steve Bosworth on the Spanta thing. Fletcher
might work, or else he might have thoughts about other policy schools."
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Thursday, May 13, 2010 2:33 PM
Abedin, Huma
For Karzai walk
SRAP pulled together the following:,
We recommend you raise the following issues with President Karzai in your private session."
87;"Here is what PJ said on the subject:
The Secretary this morning spoke with Turkish Foreign Minister Davutoglu regarding Iran. During the call, the Secretary
stressed that, in our view, Iran's recent diplomacy was an attempt to stop Security Council action without actually taking
steps to address international concerns about its nuclear program. There's nothing new and nothing encouraging in
Iran's recent statements. It has failed to demonstrate good faith and build confidence with the international
community, which was the original intent of the Tehran research reactor proposal. It has yet to formally respond to the
IAEA. She stressed that the burden is with Iran and its lack of seriousness about engagement requires us to intensify
efforts to apply greater pressure on Iran. That was the primary purpose of the conversation. They briefly touched on
other subjects, including Middle East peace and the relationship between Turkey and Azerbaijan."
87;"He is going to Ft Campbell tomorrow and then heading back with the Afghan delegation straight from there. So it does
not look like there will be an opportunity to see him with Jack tomorrow."
87;"Dennis finally completed his call with Molho, after two hours of secure phone technology travails. He gave me a brief
readout. I can provide, or you might just call him."
87;"One thing I forgot to mention - Bill B and Mike Posner recommend that you release the below statement. Apparently
Hamidi's execution is imminent. With your approval we'll put out.
DRAFT STATEMENT BY SECRETARY CLINTON
Urging Iran to Respect the Fundamental Freedoms of its Citizens
The United States is deeply concerned that Iran continues to deny its citizens their civil rights, as well as to intimidate
and detain those Iranians who seek to hold their government accountable and who stand up for the rights of their
fellow citizens. We remain troubled by the case of Sakineh Mohammadi Ashtiani, who garnered international attention
for her verdict of death by stoning. While the Iranian government later stated she would not face execution by stoning,
her fate has been left unclear. We are also troubled by reports that Ebrahim Hamidi, an 18-year old charged with
homosexuality, faces imminent execution despite the fact that he is currently without legal representation. Neither of
their cases have proceeded with the transparency or due process enshrined in Iran's own constitution and their lawyer,
Mohammad Mostafaei, felt that he had no other choice than to flee Iran after he had been questioned by authorities
and his family members had been detained.
We are also concerned about the fate of Iranians who are in danger of imminent execution for exercising their right to
free expression after the June 2009 elections, including Jafar Kazemi, Mohammad Haj Aghaei, and Javad Lan.
The United States urges the Iranian government to halt these executions in accordance with its international obligations
to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and calls for the immediate release of all political prisoners
and imprisoned human rights defenders. The United States will continue to stand with people all around the world who
seek to exercise their universal rights and to speak out in defense of human liberties."
87;FYI
87;Makes sense. We'll get it done. Presume you want Jack on.
87;Got it. We'll set it up.
87;"FYI — the Colombians are starting to brief the press on evidence of FARC activity in Venezuela. We'll monitor over night
and tomorrow."
87;"RELEASE IN
PART B5"
87;"Mitchell meets with BN tomorrow in Jerusalem, Abbas Saturday, BN again Saturday, then to Cairo for Mubarak on
Sunday.
They will take the call down."
87;10.2 is latest figure based on end FY 09-10 data. (Pakistan fiscal year ends jun 30 so just finalized)
87;Fyi
87;"Vail felt that Anne's assessment of the new Pakistani submission was too negative. He believes it is their opening
position - that it is quite sophisticated - and that it represents a real step forward from their initial 56-page list of
demands.
He acknowledges that it is lighter on the things we care about, but notes for example that productive items like the
strategic dialogue get far more space than unproductive items like civ-nuke.
He very much agrees with your concept of annotating the document."
87;Fyi
87;FYI. Would like to check in with you on this in am.
87;"Fyi - see below. i discussed with Larry. This is not about anything specific you've said, it's the PakMil's general rejoinder to
the American message. But it is worth keeping this critique in mind."
87;"Here is the readout:
Here is Molho's readout of BN's meeting with Mubarak. Pretty consistent with what GM hear
But Hale met with Suleiman last night
YM's Readout:
1.4(B)
1.4(E)
B1
1.4(D) — Declassify on: 08/26/2035"
87;"Below are points for the press on the plane. I'll have a hard copy printed:
First major ministerial in Afghanistan since the 1970s. The very fact of it is a big deal.
Context is important. This is not out of the blue, it's not just a random gathering; it's part of a systematic process:
Karzai's inauguration, announcement of the President's strategy, London conference, Peace Jirga, and now the Kabul
conference.
Increasing Afghan leadership and ownership: They are presenting a set of concrete programs on governance, service
delivery, security transition, economic development, and reintegration. These programs are detailed; they are serious;
and they reflect months of work and consultation.
Increasing international alignment: The international community is coordinating with each other - through ISAF, Sedwill,
de Mistura, etc. - and aligning its efforts with the Afghan programs and priorities being set forth at this conference. This
is NOT a pledging conference. It is an opportunity to ensure we are effectively supporting Afghan government
leadership and ownership
Follow-through and accountability: In his inauguration, Karzai laid out a credible vision; in London, the Afghan
government committed to developing and pursuing specific plans in a variety of areas; at Kabul, we'll be heavily focused
on implementation. This is about mutual accountability for the pledges made and the programs set forth.
July 2011: The president's strategy reflects both urgency and resolve: increased resources and intensity in our efforts to
take the fight to the enemy and to build Afghan capacity to effect a conditions-based transition; and a long-term civilian
commitment to support Afghanistan long into the future.
Clear strategy: Reverse the momentum of the Taliban; build the capacity of Afghan security forces; and as Afghans
develop the capability to stabilize their country, we must draw down our combat presence and make a responsible
transition to Afghan leadership.
Clear desired end-state: An Afghan state that is willing and strong enough to ensure that global terrorists never again
have safe haven within its borders; can withstand internal and external threats; and can continue to make long-term
political and economic progress, all with sustainable levels of international support.
Civ-mil cooperation: Unfortunate to lose General McChrystal, but maintained continuity with General Petraeus and we
have only intensified our civ-mil engagement both in Kabul and Washington.
Reconciliation: Stress that it is Afghan-led. Note red-lines."
87;"We didn't receive this email last night for some reason but we were working thru similar additions - Megan will have for
you soon."
87;We'll have it to you in 15 mins.
87;Fyi
87;Fyi.
87;Fyi
87;Fyi
87;Fyi
87;"Latest update:
Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sunday, May 16, 2010 10:30 PM
H
Mills, Cheryl D
Iran"
87;"Rich is going to talk to Feingold's COS and walk him through the reasoning/defense of our policy. Since this is a classified
letter, you couldn't talk about it in open session tomorrow in any event, but if he asks you can say that we have had
substantive discussions with his staff on the concerns raised in the letter and you're happy to discuss it further in closed
session."
87;Yikes. Will track down.
87;"FYI, from WHA:
Mexican law enforcement officials cannot stop individuals and require proof of migratory status. However, like
SB1070, officials in the course of official ""contact"" (i.e. Traffic stops, investigations, hot pursuit) are authorized
to request proof of migratory status. They do this in practice routinely. Frequently, individuals who cannot
prove legal status are referred to INM (federal CBP-equivalent). In practice, GoM authorities at all levels
engage in exploitative treatment of migrants, primarily Central Americans heading to the US. These abuses
have been well documented by international human rights groups, as well as by multiple documentary and
news media reports."
87;Hear hear
87;Fyi on the wmd free zone in the me.
87;"Mitchell's team contacted me to make sure you had received the HBJ readout. I received it yesterday and it should be in
the set of Middle East docs I gave to Huma to give to you when we got off the plane. It should be in your materials.
Apologies for not flagging yesterday when we landed."
87;"Looks like there will be a three-way meeting in Turkey tomorrow.
B1
1.4(D)"
87;Yes. We are already working on that.
87;I saw he put in a call for you.
87;"Mexico
And there is some Judith McHale component to it because she is going down there to consult on this spreadsheet"
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sunday, July 25, 2010 11:24 AM
Fw: Update: Jordanian Foreign Minister Judeh has requested to speak with the Secretary
on a secure line"
87;"Importance: High
Fyi"
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJi@state.gov>
Sunday, July 25, 2010 12:21 PM
Fw: GM's conversation with FM Frattini
RELEASE IN
PART
4(B),B1,1.4(D)
Fyi
Reason: 1.4(B), 1.4(D) — Declassify on: 07/24/2025"
87;It appears that he wants to raise some sensitive issues with you - so it's hard to do up a specific call sheet.
87;"on a secure line
Roger."
87;I mistakenly wrote in your notes that it was tomorrow — it is of course Thursday.
87;FYI
87;Sorry to bother you, and promise to keep it to a minimum,
87;Passed 308-114.
87;"FYI
George Richert
May 25, 2010 6:00 p.m.
A new Buffalo Bill is catching the world's attention.
On the practice field Tuesday afternoon, he was just another Bill, a rookie no less, but he's
catching a lot of attention in his family's homeland.
In China this week, during a speech to dignitaries at the USA Pavilion, Secretary of State Hillary
Clinton said this:
""From Yo-Yo Ma to I.M. Pei to Commerce Secretary Gary Locke and Energy Secretary Chu,
Chinese-Americans have achieved great success in business, government, the arts, sciences and
sports. And to that end, I was pleased to hear that the Buffalo Bills have recently drafted the
first Chinese-American to play in the NFL,"" said Clinton.
Buffalo Bills offensive tackle Ed Wang said, ""It felt good. She's a very important person, and so
for someone like that to talk about me, it just feels good.""
Wang didn't know until he heard from News 4 that he was mentioned in Shanghai. The 6'5"", 250
pound Bills rookie wasn't born in China, but both of his parents were Chinese Olympians in track
and field, so he loves breaking new ground in football.
>»In George's reporter's notebook, he explains why the Buffalo Bills limit media access to the
first 15 minutes of practice
""It is important to me just because I am the first, and I take a lot of pride in being Chinese, but
at the same time, I know that I'm out here to play football,"" said Wang.
Wang is expected to make the team, and his goal is to make a difference."
87;"FYI — from Morningstar:
The Turkey-Azerbaijan Agreement was not signed last week in spite of both leaders having said that it would be.
Erdogan and Aliyev are now saying June 7 or 8. We have learned that a serious commercial arose that needs to be
resolved. I hope it will be but am making no predictions. One could also speculate that Medvedev's visit to Turkey may
have been a factor. S should be aware of this. Thanks... Dick"
87;"Getting good feedback on your remarks. The early stories look good, too. More than one person has asked me, did she
do all that off the cuff?
I'll leave Philippe to answer the tax the rich question, but I loved it."
87;"A few quick items:
Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Thursday, May 27, 2010 7:34 PM
H
Items
1. Saw you did a conference call with Jim, Tom, and Bill. Bill had called me about the Lavrov call — I don't know
where you ended up, but we thought you might consider
Let me know what you think.
2. You might as
3. Kurt called to say that the Aussie FM wants to speak with you ""for two minutes"" to give you some ""good news
on Afghanistan."" Good news calls are hard to come by, so...
4. I'd like to download two conversations with you tomorrow — first, with
Frank Ricciardone.
second, with"
87;We'll make sure a rep is there.
87;"The current revcon document includes a paragraph on North Korea.
How would you like to proceed?"
87;From Bill.
87;"RELEASE IN PART
B5,B6"
87;"I will be on a plane from 630 til 1245 eastern but easily reachable thereafter.
I recommend"
87;"Draft statement for use in the Council Chamber, May 31, 2010
Thank you, Mr. President. Assistant Secretary-General Fernandez-Taranco, thank you for your briefing."
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Monday, May 31, 2010 3:52 PM
Fw: Remarks by Ambassador Alejandro Wolff, Deputy Permanent U.S. Representative to
the United Nations, at an Emergency Session of the Security Council, May 31, 2010
FYI"
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Monday, May 31, 2010 4:29 PM
H
Re: Remarks by Ambassador Alejandro Wolff, Deputy Permanent U.S. Representative to
the United Nations, at an Emergency Session of the Security Council, May 31, 2010"
87;FYI
87;Nothing earth-shaking in the meeting. Better to report by phone than in writing.
87;Below is a draft statement:
87;Fyi - Johnnie's conversation w prez of Ghana.
87;Fyi - this should be good.
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivan11@state.gov>
Tuesday, August 24, 2010 9:23 AM
H; McHale, Judith A; Mills, Cheryl D
Lew, Jacob
Re: Billions of aid dollars buy U.S. little goodwill in Pakistan
Adding Cheryl back to chain."
87;Responding just to you and Cheryl.
87;Yep - help - that's the point I was trying to make.
87;Roger.
87;Fyi
87;Fyi from Sen Mitchell - he'd like to discuss results of AM meeting with you.
87;"Fyi - Sandy sent the attached thoughts that I think you'll find quite useful. I think you should see/call him when you're
back."
87;Yes - I would put him and Martin lndyk on the list.
87;FYI.
87;FYI.
87;FYI. We are working some of this into the remarks.
87;FYI
87;"FYI - Jerusalem mayor causing problem again with sensitive housing plan that could result in further
demolitions/dislocations.
Dan and David have engaged Molho."
87;
87;"This is the proposed statement:
STATEMENT BY SECRETARY CLINTON
One-Year Anniversary of Release of Abdel Basset Mohamed al-Megrahi"
87;You've probably heard but they are holding the article for a day at least.
87;I just got it. CDM now has.
87;"Also, WashPost has now flipped it's decision and intends to run the piece. RCH will reach out to Hiatt, but it's not clear
what else we can do."
87;Fyi
87;Fyi
87;Fyi
87;"Importance: High
Fyi"
87;
87;
87;"First, you've doubtless heard
Second, I just gave extensive comments to Lissa and AMS on the article. Think I see a path to a decent place."
87;
87;I did.
87;"Spoke to Kurt. He said he couldn't get any joy on sending a positive signal on an Indonesia trip. Sounds like it well may
not happen at all.
So he said we have no give in this call; just an ask. But we urges that it be made.
Unsatisfying I know, but there we are..."
87;"Fyi
10/13/2035"
87;"Just as I put those guys back on the front foot - this came in.
Look forward to discussing."
87;FYI - you probably know this, but...
87;"they update as of 840 pm is that the ball is in their court as they weigh the deal with shas and our concerns. dan
will talk to molho and/or dermer very late tonight our time/first thing sunday there. i'll send you an update early
in the morning.
>"
87;"another wrinkle -- uzi arad gave an interview saying we have now given them written assurances, possibly
laying the groundwork for a vote tomorrow BEFORE we have worked through the remaining issues. they may
have decided to just go for it. dan will follow up.
On Sat, Nov 20, 2010 at 8:41 PM, Jake Sullivan < > Wrote:
they update as of 840 pm is that the ball is in their court as they weigh the deal with shas and our
concerns. dan will talk to molho and/or dermer very late tonight our time/first thing sunday there. i'll send you
an update early in the morning.
>"
87;"Fyi - Prince is working with Dermer to get a common line.
Meanwhile, I just watched my first ever women's field hockey game - Maryland beat UNC to win the national
championship."
87;"Here's the list of deep dives we were thinking of doing in the next few months:
Sept: Indonesia (pre-Comprehensive Ptshp Dialogue), Russia (pre-NRC)
October: India (pre-POTUS trip), Balkans (pre-your potential trip to the Balkans)
November: Central Asia (pre-your trip)
And then other deep dives for the future (or whenever it might be timely):
Iran (pre-P5+1?)
Egypt
Turkey/Cyprus
Mexico
Brazil"
87;Fyi - cryptic to me.
87;Also fyi. Not sure what to make of Kim's inquiry.
87;"The team believes that some high level strategic targeted Hill calls are needed to explain our position on the settlement
moratorium extension. The thought was:
S calls to Kerry, Berman, Lowey, Feinstein;
Mitchell calls to Levin, Lugar, Leahy.
We would get points to you tomorrow, for calls over the weekend if possible, or Monday.
Does this work?"
87;"Received. Just out of a SVTC on the Europe issue.
On Sat, Oct 2, 2010 at 2:31 PM, H <HDR22@c1intonemai1.com> wrote:"
87;Here is what we propose you use to present in the cabinet call tonight:
87;I'll be here at the office for awhile -- happy to talk secure at any time. Just let me know what works for you.
87;"yes. i will be on a call at 130. can i call you at 230?
On Sun, Oct 3, 2010 at 1:05 PM, H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
I can do after 2--does that work?"
87;"trying to reach your yellow phone now
On Sun, Oct 3, 2010 at 1:09 PM, H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
Yes."
87;"Not yet - EAP inquiring.
-----"
87;Fyi
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Monday, September 20, 2010 7:33 AM
Saudis
This is the readout we got from Denise Moraga, who is traveling with Brennan:"
87;Latest draft of letter is on your chair.
87;"Miserable evening with the Arabs, with all of them reinforcing each other on moratorium walk-out. Euros just as bad.
Fayyad was the only bright light."
87;"Basic principles for NYT ed board:
US principles: gov't should reflect election results; gov't must have significant role for Iraqiyya (good for internal stability
and regional integration); gov't formation should include a strong reform and power-sharing understanding; we want a
gov't as committed to the long-term partnership with us as we are. These are principles backed by all Iraqi leaders, who
need to make decisions now to break the deadlock.
We have no candidate for PM. We have encouraged Allawi's Iraqiyya and Maliki's State of Law to see if they can work
together, because that reflects the votes and would give the new gov't a healthy majority. But who fills what position --
that's for the Iraqis to decide.
There may be other ways to have a gov't. But this should happen soon. Where we would have concerns: if the Sadrists
end up with the power to veto gov't decisions or to topple the gov't."
87;"Senkaku is the Japanese name
Diayou is the Chinese name (the Diayoutai guesthouse is named after the islands) I've seen reference to both in articles.
We say Senkaku."
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Monday, September 20, 2010 9:24 AM
Re: Island names"
87;"Sullivan, Jacob .1 <Sullivann@state.gov>
Wednesday, November 24, 2010 3:34 PM
H; jake.sullivar
RE: Anwar Ibrahim
According to our team, this is likely misinformation spread by political opponents of his.
-----"
87;"Here is the latest from Lissa, Jake, and me (I took over from Lissa this morning because her son is winning all his soccer
matches somewhere.in Pennsylvania). We still have a bunch of things to add (as you will see in yellow), but this is
definitely ready for you to engage. I think it will make a real impact, and it fits Jim Hoge's desire not just to make this a
report card on the QDDR but to advance some bigger animating ideas.
Some questions:
I hope this is a read that improves your vacation mood rather than detracting from it!
AM"
87;FYI - see below.
87;"Hope you are having a (relatively) quiet day with the family.
I'm taking a break from peeling potatoes to report the following:
I've circulated a call sheet for your conversation with Bibi to the group and asked them to look at it tomorrow morning
(no need to make them do it today) so that we can have a consensus recommendation for how you should approach the
call. The idea would be to send you the call sheet around noon tomorrow in time for an afternoon call, if you have the
time."
87;Anytime - I've got my phone with me.
87;"Our mission to the OECD wants to announce USG support for Angel Gurria's reappointment at OECD Secretary
General. Bob and Froman both support. Most other countries have already said they support; there are no other
candidates; and the OECD has never not given a SG a second term. Nobody in the USG has raised objections. Just
wanted to flag for you in case you had concerns."
87;202 647 8947
87;I think I can track down this binder today and get it to you.
87;We will fax a version of these to you shortly.
87;Roger.
87;Yep -- working through them now.
87;"Very much so. I am also making a few changes as well, and there are a couple of places where I have questions on your
edits. I'll have a new draft back to you in 2 hours."
87;Fyi
87;Burns recommends that we hold you back for a call to Menon on Monday. That is the current plan.
87;"We are now tracking for Tues to roll out next steps, so l's wondering whether you can talk to Bibi tomorrow evening.
Would mean doing it on the plane. But probably makes more sense. Thoughts?"
87;"I've just sent Jon my updated version. I know you said you just want this to be done — and I don't blame you — but take a
look at what I've done. I've flagged a few things I think should change. With one more pass by you, and a few more
adjustments by us, I think this is good to go for Monday."
87;See below suggested holding press line
87;Roger. We'll make the changes, clean it up, and sent last round to you tomorrow.
87;"Below are proposed pts and background for handling the WI issue with Davut tomorrow. I'm sending to specials to print
for you.
Points for FM Davutoglu on Wikileaks
. Spiegel Online previews the
Der Spiegel analysis (set for publication tomorrow) that ""if one were to believe the gloomy reports from the embassy in
Ankara, Turkey is on a slippery slope to volatile Islamism, spurred on by the narrow-minded government of Prime
Minister Recept Tayyip Erdogan, who is portrayed as being reliant on a group of incompetent advisors.""
Talking Points:
\"
87;Yes - the scenesetter and the general cable on Turkey's foreign policy
87;I can't even begin to tell you....
87;I hear they have great diving...
87;Touche
87;Fyi
87;"RELEASE IN PART
B6
I emailed Jeff yesterday and have not heard back. Will ping again this am.
On Mon, Nov 29, 2010 at 7:50 AM, H <HDR22@c1intonemai1.com> wrote:
Did you find out if he's going to China?"
87;For your situational awareness.
87;"The Indian foreign ministry has been pinging us to have a call between you and Krishna on the nuclear liability
legislation. Bill believes you should call Krishna today — because he will be in receive mode —
SCA is drafting that message with Bill's guidance. You could then call Menon tomorrow or Wednesday.
If you agree, we'll get the call sheet out to you soon."
87;FYI
87;"We're continuing to make small tweaks to the CFR speech. Wanted to see how you were feeling about it/whether
you've had the chance to go through and edit."
87;Fyi
87;Fyi
87;Fyi - small good news
87;"1. Churkin called Susan back.
B1
1.4(B)
1.4(D)
2. Feltman just called.
B5
12/17/2025"
87;"Importance: High
Fyi"
87;"Looks like he will go to Juba and Khartoum next week.
I recommend that you call him so we can read it out."
87;"The plan now is to do the reconciliation mtg at 1015 and then the EJK mtg at 11.
Are you okay doing the first and then having someone else stand in on the second? Problem is that Jim, Bill, and Jack
are out tomorrow. So not clear who it would be - perhaps Rich?"
87;Fyi
87;See below
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Monday, August 30, 2010 3:31 PM
H
Fw: From B6
Fyi"
87;"P proposing you put out the below based on bombing in Iran today. Thoughts?
For Immediate Release September 22, 2010
STATEMENT BY SECRETARY CLINTON
Explosion in Mahabad, Iran
I condemn the bombing targeting Iranians attending a parade in Mahabad today. The United States deplores this
senseless loss of life and extends its sympathy to the families and loved ones of those injured and killed. We also call for
the perpetrators of this horrific attack to be held accountable for their actions.
The United States condemns terrorism and all forms violence against innocent people, wherever it occurs, and stands
with the victims of these appalling acts. This attack underscores the global community's need to work together to
combat terrorist organizations that threaten the lives of innocent civilians all around the world.
###"
87;"jake.sullivan
Wednesday, September 22, 2010 1:57 PM
Mitchell
B6
1.4(B)
1.4(D)
B1
Sent from my BlackBerry® smartphone with SprintSpeed
09/22/2025"
87;FYI
87;"paymasters
FYI"
87;Fyi
87;"It's worth you checking in with him before the meeting. His quick report of meeting with Allawi:
1. Allawi said he pulled back from striking a deal with ISCI because he is concerned that the Shia representation is
too small and there is too much difficulty in trying to widen
2. Allawi asked bill if he thought Maliki was serious, suggesting that he was toying with the idea of a grand coalition
3. Allawi will see Barzani on the 11th
Bill's overall take is that Allawi might now be looking to test the wider coalition proposition and is not as interested in
the ISCI gambit as first option.
Bill has also seen AI-Mahdi Talabani and Zebari. He said there would be a good meeting with Maliki he's obviously
feeling confident, but was firm on limiting role of Sadrists and need to bring Iraqiyya into inclusive govt."
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <Sullivann@state.gov>
Thursday, September 23, 2010 10:24 AM
H
Israel flights
Flight from JFK leaves 725pm tonight and gets in at 1215pm tomorrow.
I told Hale Blair was thinking of"
87;Copy that - will do.
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivarW@state.gov>
Wednesday, October 6, 2010 10:57 PM
Fw: (Haaretz) Israeli Labor party expects new settlement freeze as payoff for loyalty oath"
87;"From Israel Radio
By Shmuel Tal
""Prime Minister Exploring a trip to the U.S. next week
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu is exploring the possibility of leaving at the beginning of next week to New York
and Washington in order to meet with European leaders under the auspices of a gathering that is initiated by President
Obama with the leaders. In addition, he is requesting to meet with the President of the United States Barack Obama and
discuss the issue of Iran sanctions and its nuclear program. No confirmation has been given yet for those meetings to the
trip has not been finalized yet."""
87;"Some cats and dogs:
1. Talked to Denis about EU summit issue and Saakashvili. He said he would work both of them.
2. Hikers meeting was interesting and will fill you in Monday. Bottom line — we are actively working a number of
the options, including the British option.
3. Saw Kurt this evening to discuss a potential Asia speech in Hawaii and he was focused on Jim again. I know you
spoke with him and assume he gave you the same analysis.
4. Sent you updates on Libya — it played as we expected...a demand for a complete settlement freeze including
•Jerusalem. Our press line will be to gloss over that and focus on the top line: We have Arab support for efforts
to create conditions to continue the negotiations .... i.e., no collapse. You will receive tomorrow morning two
Plan B documents, one from the Mitchell team and one from Dennis Ross.
Will continue to report this weekend."
87;Odd - the specials say they sent to NY and got confirmation. Working to get them out again.
87;Sorry - just seeing. I was told they were sent and received. Will check.
87;I flagged same thing - Dan S said he would revert first thing tomorrow.
87;Fyi
87;"Quick summary of Burma elections:
While there was no independent election observation or monitoring of Burma's November 7 elections, anecdotal and
initial media reports suggest low to medium voter turnout. There were no major incidents that disrupted polling,
according to available information. The United States declined to participate in staged-Government of Burma (GOB) led
""election tours"" as did EU missions. Though all signs point to a full victory for pro-regime parties, the GOB has not
announced election results yet and has not provided any clear indication of when it plans to do so. Opposition and exile
groups claim advance voting schemes are one indication of significant fraud and vote rigging. End Summary."
87;See Alon's analysis below
87;No - we spoke for about 30 mins before the meeting - he said he'd try to call after but did not.
87;"sullivanil@state.gov
we will get you the most up-to-date chapter 3 tomorrow.
On Tue, Nov 9, 2010 at 10:23 PM, H <HDR22@c1intonemai1.com> wrote:
Will I get the revised chapter 3 tomorrow?"
87;This is Jonathan's email on the issue:
87;FYI
87;Many thanks. And we're getting there, I PROMISE you. AM
87;This was bubbling in news reports...
87;"See below
Also, Allawi appears to be in."
87;
87;Will call shortly.
87;Fyi
87;"Yes.
On Thu, Sep 16, 2010 at 8:02 AM, H <HDR22@e1intonemai1.com> wrote:
Can you find out what the status is of Jim S's efforts on this? You may not be able to do so before my mtg w
the King. But I need to know what to say to him and in the press statement about it."
87;"Daniel teed up for tomorrow.
You'll see Bibi call sheet but call timing is in flux as we discussed.
Letter still being worked."
87;Have you read the letter? Will it work?
87;This was the written interview where you met the journalist and took the photo.
87;
87;Fyi
87;He has some interesting reports from the Pal side, if you have a moment to talk secure.
87;Fyi
87;"Sullivan, Jacob.) <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Monday, December 27, 2010 7:46 AM
Khodorkovsky verdict
Embassy Moscow and Bill recommend that we put out the below statement in your name.
STATEMENT BY SECRETARY CLINTON
Statement on the Verdict in the Khodorkoysky/Lebedev Case"
87;Flying back this morning. Back this afternoon.
87;Me too! On way to airport now - think DC is okay.
87;"Tom has expressed a different view on the Hof trip. From my perspective, it's obvious that this is your call. But it might
be worth touching base with him."
87;Cheryl and I
87;
87;Read from bottom up.
87;Fyi
87;"See below from Daniel.
What's so crazy is that they roundly rejected the first moratorium in large measure because it excluded Jerusalem and
now they are saying the difference is that this one clearly excludes Jerusalem!"
87;Looks very much like there will be a vote today.
87;Copy
87;
87;Trying to figure out what's actually happening here.
87;Fyi
87;Fyi
87;"•
FYI — see below. Dennis is on a plane today but we will talk secure this evening."
87;"Suggests that you offer the possibility of you signing the slightly modified offer.
The one thing we have to be careful of is the criticism that we are spending 1.7 billion for 3 months. We have good
answers, but that's the criticism."
87;Easy come, easy go. See below
87;Sorry - just seeing. Arturo will see him 1-1 privately at 4 today.
87;"jake.sullivar
Friday, September 24, 2010 3:24 PM
Re: Pls let me know when Dennis and Dan return.
I will - we haven't heard any word."
87;"jake.sullivar
Sunday, November 14, 2010 12:52 PM
H
Re: Can you send me the final copy of the document from Thursday asapby email?
I don't have it by email. Let me see if Dan does"
87;
87;My sense is that all will be fine with working the changes. Tom was just blowing off steam.
87;Sent from other email. Blair news not positive. If you're free we can connect you with him now.
87;Fyi
87;Just fyi
87;
87;FYI. Two people emailed me to say this speech was great. I haven't read it yet.
87;"RELEASE IN PART
1.4(B),B1,1.4(D),B6"
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Tuesday, November 16, 2010 5:15 PM
FW: (AP) Fate of Mideast talks in hands of polarizing rabbi
Worth reading."
87;
87;
87;In mtg with Egyptians. Will call in when done.
87;We're going to send you letter in a few.
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Saturday, September 25, 2010 7:25 PM
Language"
87;Did you want to do another call before the 1115?
87;Points for Call to
87;"jake.sullivan
Sunday, September 26, 2010 1:40 PM
H
Re: Any reactions?
I think"
87;"jake.sullivan
Sunday, September 26, 2010 1:42 PM
Re: Any reactions?
All the rest of this is"
87;I think B5
87;"Ok
Sullivan,
Sunday,
Re: Info for
Jacob J <SullivanJJ©state.gov>
September 26, 2010 2:50 PM
you
RELEASE IN PART
1.4(B),B1,B5,1.4(D),B6
— Reason: 1.4(B), 1.4(D) — Declassify on: 09/25/2035"
87;"RELEASE IN PART
B1,1.4(B),1.4(D), B5, B6
Yep — Reason: 1.4(B), 1.4(D) — Declassify on: 09/25/2035"
87;"RELEASE IN PART
B1,1.4(B),1.4(D), B5, B6
He's staying
on: 09/26/2035"
87;Should at least be Sunday. One less day of bldng
87;
87;
87;"B1, 1.4(B),1.4(D), B5,
B6
Roger - we'll work em. Classified by DAS, A/GIS, DoS on 08/27/2015 —
Class: CONFIDENTIAL — Reason: 1.4(B),
1.4(D), B1 — Declassify on: 09/27/2025"
87;"- 10-09-20.doc
A positive message from Les on Mexico!"
87;"Jake Sullivan
Wednesday, September 29, 2010 10:16 AM
RELEASE IN PART
sullivanjj@state.gov B1,1.4(B),1.4(D), B6
Re: Are you there yet?
1.4(B), 1.4(D), B1 — Declassify on: 09/29/2025
B6
As usual, your emails aren't showing up in my State account. Still working on that problem.
We met with Bibi for 2.5 hours today. Happy to talk secure at your convenience. The highlights are as follows:
On Wed, Sep 29, 2010 at 1:16 PM, H <HDR22@c1intonemail.com> wrote:
Anything happening? 1.4(B)
1.4(D)
B1"
87;Fyi
87;We just finished More on secure line when you are available.
87;"Antony
Your time with Antony was well-spent."
87;Fyi
87;
87;"Mitchell and team leave at 5 tomorrow for Qatar. My inclination is that my value add to the team declines in making
these Arab rounds, so I was thinking of flying back overnight tomorrow night. But if you believe I can be of use out here,
I'm certainly prepared to stay."
87;FYI -- see chain on PSC issue.
87;"Jake Sullivan <jake.sullivar
Sunday, October 24, 2010 2:13 PM
H
point on tone w karl and petraeus"
87;FYI.
87;FYI.
87;"Bill consulted further today and now feels comfortable on the Putin-Medvedev angle. So I was premature in raising it.
Hu might go. Can't leave the tiger playing field to the Chinese."
87;This is a follow up note from Rich but he'll settle for McConnell.
87;Kerry.
87;Fyi.
87;Coming
87;"while, some short takes for H and you--and, please, no one else:
Fyi - some interesting nuggets in here."
87;"I hope you don't read any of this but I've given Huma a complete draft of QDDR plus four key docs:
The first is the decision memo you asked for; second is recommendations for reforming rather than eliminating 10
bureau; third and fourth are two alternative approaches to the major development initiatives (one is the standard
approach; the other is Cheryl's that she'd like to discuss with you)."
87;"Ready to talk at your convenience. Timing is somewhat flexible - we have to circulate to interagency on the 19th - but
the sooner we nail down decisions the better."
87;Yep - can do.
87;Happy to come over if you'd like
87;Good stuff.
87;Fyi
87;Fyi
87;"We'll keep working it.
We can make the Iran fix.
On the overall wordiness, etc., Megan has known that it needs smoothing/streamlining/sharpening and intended to
spend the day doing that."
87;I've told ops to hold any further dissemination until you have talked with these guys about how to execute the call back.
87;"One thing I forgot - Holbrooke called me this morning. He urged again that you see Lam bah (Tom is seeing him; Bill
Burns has provided guidance on points you could make if you do). He also inquired aggressively about Karl's future. And
he wants to come see you about Frank's last trip."
87;Fyi
87;Turns out the French got through to him today on Cote d'Ivoire — would you be up for calling him tomorrow?
87;For your viz.
87;FYI.
87;FYI
87;"You have the points for the Motho meeting (what Sen Mitchell handed you today). Not sure if you got the non-paper — it
is being faxed to your house tonight."
87;"Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov>
Sunday, December 12, 2010 11:07 AM
H
*ake.sullivan B6
B51
Jim is seeking your guidance on whether
Just wanted to confirm."
87;Can we discuss?
87;Fyi
87;"Death of Holbrookell.y,J3_4.:5 _043.) ,:u1.01 ,,..01L.4,13 6.11 ,
4 ydAlo i.5.9j4.111b3 /
See below (keep scrolling down to the English)."
87;"fyi
Forwarded message"
87;Worth a read.
87;"B6
I assume you saw this by now -- if not, it's worth a read.
Forwarded message"
87;See below.
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
86;"Great job this morning. Glad it went well.
Hope you get a few hours off this afternoon -- though I assume that with the China prep not likely.
On Sat, Jul 25, 2009 at 8:46 PM, H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
Is the 50k figure State and AID?
Kurdistan election results?
Can you find out for me how many Nazi prison camps we had in US during WW2 and what we did w the
detainees--did we ever try any? Did we deport them after war ended?
Re Sudan: how do you pronounce Abyei?
What is % and dollar increase in 2010 budget for ops and aid?
I don't understand the answer to the prostitution policy question. What's the simplest way to say it?"
86;"Just saw the emails to myP7account. Will follow up with Froman and Nelson.
B6"
86;"730 works for me
Thx"
86;Feel free to call if I can help with anything before the meeting today. Ops can reach me at my DC apartment.
86;"Lew, Jacob J <LewJJ@state.gov>
Wednesday, December 23, 2009 10:23 PM
H
Talking Points on Budget
RELEASE IN PART
B5"
86;"I just asked Ops if we might be able to talk for a minute before your 10:45 call with Sec Gates. The call is on a different
subject, but the Yemen 1206 package may come up and I wanted to brief you where things stand as of this morning. It
was on his desk for signature yesterday and I asked that it be pulled back so we could work through some last issues
today. I was planning to touch base with you before signing off. Thanks."
86;"This is not a fair assessment of the position we have taken. We have more than tripled to level of assistance from what
was proposed in the last Administration and have expressed flexibility about how to structure it. Jeff has consistently
been pushing the Palauns to press for more. Kurt reached out to him per your instruction and we will get you a
complete memo."
86;"Welcome back. I changed my plans and will be back in DC this morning. I have meetings between 9 and noon but will
be available any time in the afternoon today or tomorrow and can work around your schedule. After spending several
hours on the phone last night I wanted to come back and attend to some of the logistical coordination issues."
86;Sorry to confirm they are not in.
86;"Copying Rich -- I cannot explain. He was with us until 6 pm yesterday when he reached the conclusion that it would
bring down the rule."
86;
86;"After a cloture petition was prepared there was a negotiation and Landrieu released her hold. Voice vote in the end.
More words of thanks and farewell to follow, but wanted to share the news."
86;"Thanks so much -- for your leadership and friendship and for the opportunity to be part of this great team.
All best.
Jack"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
90;"Steinberg, James B <SteinbergJB@state.gov>
Thursday, April 02, 2009 12:32 PM
H
RE: IAEA
I also talked with Kerry about this, and subsequently
Would like to discuss our thoughts about this at your convenience. I will be seeing the"
90;Message sent to north thru ny. No word back
90;"I've suggested to jake that it be either of pending their onward assignments and asked hi$ to
run this by you and cheryl"
90;Continuing various other channels including jcs
90;Have it now.
90;"From Colombia
Sorry to miss the festivities!
Jim"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
73;"Super, thanks. Gina
On Wed, Dec 2, 2009 at 6:38 AM, H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
I would love to see you on Dec 14th as you pass thru town. I'm asking Huma and Lona to schedule a time for
us to catch up. Hope all is well w you and yours, H"
73;"RELEASE IN
PART B6
Affectionately, Gina"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
41;Yes, we will. Thank you, Courtney
41;"today
Madam Secretary,
Ops has confirmed your call with Hungarian Prime Minister Bajnai at 7:30 a.m. this morning.
Regards,
Courtney"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
"Anne-Marie Slaughter
Sunday, March 13, 2011 9:39 PM
Jacob Mills, Cheryl D; Reinesp@stategov; Abedin, Hurtle
piece on libya nfz that will appear on NYT op-ed page tomorrow
B6
wanted to make sure you had a heads up. AM
Anne-Marie Slaughter is a professor of politics and international affairs at Princeton.
By Anne-Marie Slaughter
PRESIDENT Obama says the noose is tightening around Col. Muammar al-Qaddafi. In fact, it is
tightening around the Libyan rebels, as Colonel Qaddafi makes the most of the world's dithering and
steadily retakes rebel-held tow.ns, The United States and Europe are temporizing on a no-flight zone
while the Organization of the Islamic Conference, the Gulf Cooperation Council and now the Arab
League have all called on the United Nations Security Council to authorize one. Opponents of a no-
flight zone have put forth five main arguments, none of which, on closer examination, hold up.
It's not in our interest. Gen. Wesley K. Clark argues that ""Libya doesn't sell much oil to the United
States"" and that while Americans ""want to support democratic movements in the region,"" they are
already doing that in Iraq and Afghanistan. Framing this issue in terms of oil is exactly what Arab
populations and indeed much of the world expect, which is why they are so cynical about our
professions of support for democracy and human rights. Now we have a chance to support a new
beginning in the Muslim world — a new beginning of accountable governments that can provide
services and opportunities for their citizens in ways that could dramatically decrease support for
terrorist groups and violent extremism. It's hard to imagine something more in our strategic interest.
It will be counter-productive. Many thoughtful commentators, including Al Jazeera's director
general, Wadah Khanfar, argue that what is most important about the Arab spring is that it is coming
from Arabs themselves. From this perspective, Western military intervention will play right into
Qaddati's hands, allowing him to broadcast pictures of Western bombs falling on Arab civilians. But
these arguments, while important, must be weighed against the appeals of of Libyan opposition
fighters asking for international help, and now, astonishingly, against support for a no-flight zone by
some of the same governments that have kept their populations quiescent by holding up the specter of
foreign intervention. Assuming that a no-flight zone can be imposed by an international coalition that
includes Arab states, we have an opportunity to establish a new narrative of Western support for Arab
democrats.
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739568
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045012
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739568
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
It won't work. The United States ambassador to NATO, Ivo H. Daaider, argues that stopping
Colonel Qaddafi's air force will not be decisive; he will continue to inflict damage with tanks and
helicopters, bombing oil refineries and depots on his way to retaking key towns. But the potential
effect of a no-flight zone must also be assessed in terms of Colonel Qaddafi's own calculations about
his future. Richard Downie of the Center for Strategic and International Studies argues that although
Colonel Qaddafi cultivates a mad-dictator image, he has been a canny survivor and political
manipulator for 40 years. He is aware of debates with regard to a no-flight zone and is timing his
military campaign accordingly; he is also capable of using his air force just enough to gain strategic
advantage, but not enough to trigger a no-flight zone. If the international community lines up against
him and is willing to crater his runways and take out his antiaircraft weapons, he might well renew his
offer of a negotiated departure.
If it does work, we don't know what we will get. Revolutions are almost always followed by internal
divisions among the revolutionaries. We should not expect a rosy, Jeffersonian Libya. But the choice
is between uncertainty and the certainty that if Colonel Qaddafi wins, regimes acrosS the region will
conclude that force is the livay to answer protests. And when Colonel Qaddafi massacres the
opposition, young protesters across the Middle East will conclude that when we were asked to support
their cause with more than words, we blinked. Americans in turn will read the words of Mr. Obama's
June 2009 speech in Cairo., with its lofty promises to stand for universal human rights, and cringe.
Let's arm the rebels instead. Some commentators who agree with the analysis above say we could
'better accomplish our goals by providing intelligence and arms to the opposition. That would, of
course, be much easier for us. It undoubtedly appeals to Mn Obama as a neat compromise between
the desire to help the protesters and the desire not to overrule his defense secretary's reluctance to
participate in a no-flight zone. But we would be providing arms not to a disciplined military, but to
ragged groups of brave volunteers who barely know how to use the weapons they have. They need
action that will change the situation on. the ground for Colonel Qaddafi, as well as his the calculations.
Moreover, by the time arms and intelligence could take effect, it is quite likely that Colonel Qaddafi
will have retaken or at least besieged .Benghazi, the opposition stronghold.
The United States should immediately ask the Security Council to authorize a no-flight zOne and
make clear to Russia and China that if they block the resolution, the blood of the Libyan opposition
will be on their hands. We should push them at least to abstain and bring the issue to a vote as soon as
possible. If we get a resolution, we should work with the Arab League to quickly assemble an
international coalition to impose the no-flight zone. If the Security Council fails toact, then we should
recognize the opposition Interim National Council as the legitimate Libyan government, as France has
done, and work with the Arab League to give the council any assistance it requests:
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739568
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045013
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739568
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
Any use of force must be carefully and fully debated, but that debate has now been had. Ifs been
raging for a week, during which almost every Arab country has come on board calling for a no-flight
zone and Colonel Qaddafi has retaken two key cities and is moving toward three more. It is time to
act. $
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739568
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045014"
"One for the wall...
For what it's worth, I am VERY dubious about arming the Libyan rebels. Our best bet is to keep pressure on BOTH sides
to force a diplo solution. Aryls
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739622
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045026"
"STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
RELEASE IN
PART B6
Anne-Marie Slaughter _
Friday. April 1,2011 11:53 AM
RE: gorgeous pie on the front page of the NWT!
Bic sending more arms into a society generally — particularly when they are as disorganized and fragmented as they are
— will result in more violence — against each other. Boys like to play with guns (trust me as the mother of sons). I am all
for saying we have no objection to French doing it to increase pressure on Gaddafi, but in a tribal society where conflicts
have been repressed for so long, adding even more weapons does not make sense. Obviously they can get weapons
from other places, but nb that they are not awash in weapons now. I wrote something for New York Review of Books
this week that builds on my farewell remarks and I think you will like it; will send it to you for weekend reading,"
"Anne-Marie Slaughter B6
Thursday, November 15, 2012 1:58 PM
Cheryl Mills; Jacob J Sullivan (SullivanJJ@state.gov); Abedin, Huma
an op-ed you should read: praises State for what Stevens did right
had lunch Admiral Mullen, who is teaching here this year; in his view Sarah gets it exactly right.
latimes.com
Op-Ed
The world after Petraeus
Obama should seize this chance to adjust his foreign policy.
By Sarah Chayes
November 15, 2012
The scandal enveloping members of America's adulated top brass is the deepest crisis to hit the military in
decades. It is a crisis President Obama did not need — shaming the country and increasing his burden during a
major transition on his national security team. And yet, crisis can be a great corrective. Obama should use this
one to reverse one of the most dysfunctional elements of U.S. foreign policy over the last decade: an infatuation
with military solutions to problems that are fundamentally political.
The resignation of former Central Intelligence Agency Director David H. Petraeus after an extramarital affair
came to light, together with expected high-level personnel changes at the State Department and other agencies,
creates a singular opportunity to embark on the complex process of rebalancing U.S. foreign policy in favor of
non-military approaches.
When he first came to office, Obama seemed suspicious of Petraeus, who made his reputation under President
George W. Bush as the general who transformed the military's approach to the Iraq war. The suspicion was
reflected in the fraught National Security Council debate over Afghanistan strategy in 2009. Yet since then,
Obama, like so many others, seems to have been seduced by Petraeus. Not by the man but by what the man
could offer him.
Petraeuss unique political genius over the last decade has been to provide each of two contrasting presidents a
military solution to his key national security problems that was tailored to his character. For Bush, obsessed
with Iraq and with leaving a mark on the Middle East, Petraeus helped design a grandiose, troop-heavy
approach.
With the change of administrations, Petraeus soon saw that Obama and his team were different — concerned
about the costs of the inherited wars and about the risks of a runaway military. So while Petraeus continued to
pay lip-service to counterinsurgency doctrine, he veered away from it in practice. His focus as commander of
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739802 STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
Date: 05/13/2015 SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045779
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739802
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
the troops in Afghanistan — and even more so at the CIA — was on a type of warfare better suited to this
president: targeted, technologically advanced, secretive killing over which the president could exert control.
But such an approach, though cheaper in resources and American lives, is still flawed. It is still a military
answer to problems that are deeply political in nature and rooted in a complex mix of history, regional and
cultural particularism, and the effects of a protracted abuse of power by elites. By shifting to drones and special
ops as the instruments of choice to combat militant extremism, the U.S. government remains consumed by the
same old questions: How many men and women in uniform, equipped with what kind of hardware, need to
employ which tactics to defeat the enemy?
What atrophied during the years that two U.S. administrations dwelt obsessively on these questions were all the
other tools of U.S. foreign policy, including information-gathering and analysis, diplomacy and economic and
legal leverage.
Perhaps the gravest consequence has been the knowledge deficit. Both wars were hampered by a devastating
lack of situational understanding. In Afghanistan, where I lived and worked for more than eight years, I was
stunned by how long it took U.S. officials to realize that tribes were key to Afghan social structure. U.S.
officials resisted meeting with ordinary Afghans, dealing instead with members of a self-serving and unpopular
government. So, for more than a decade, the U.S. government was operating almost blind.
The first way Obama can constructively harness Petraeus downfall is to reorient the CIA toward its core
function: intelligence-gathering. Of late, a body-count culture has prevailed at the CIA, exemplified by the
secretive drone campaign. If 60 intelligence professionals are assigned to planning and monitoring each drone
in the air, as has been reported, that's 60 who are not on the ground in country, interacting with locals, gaining
an intuitive feel for the dynamics. Obama should resist the temptation to put another target-focused operator at
the helm of the CIA.
Another main civilian component of U.S. power is its diplomacy. Obama should also use this moment of
transition to think through what kind of State Department he really needs. The instruments of U.S. foreign
policy are multiple, varied and subtle in their application. To avail itself of them, the government needs smart,
adaptable, dynamic risk-takers, who think strategically and operate with autonomy. Such people must be
attracted to government service and provided responsibilities commensurate with their talents.
But the other national security topic of the moment threatens to push Obama in the wrong direction. The death
of Ambassador J. Christopher Stevens in Benghazi, Libya, has been politicized in deeply counterproductive
ways. Members of Congress should bear that in mind as they continue examining the details of the attack.
Stevens was exactly the type of diplomat the U.S. government needs: someone with long experience in the
region to which he was posted, an ambassador who engaged with people, gained insight into the environment
and helped influence it. That kind of diplomacy is essential, but it carries risks. If it becomes politically
untenable in Washington for an ambassador to die in the line of duty, then talented diplomats will be hobbled.
And faced with a choked career path, the best will look elsewhere for rewarding work. Obama should appoint a
secretary of State determined to counteract the tendency to retrench.
Perhaps the most important foreign policy challenge Obama faces in his second term is how to expand,
restructure and reinforce the range of civilian instruments of U.S. power. That is a generational task, but one the
current crisis has provided an unparalleled opportunity to tackle.
Sarah Chayes, former special assistant to the chairman of the Joint Chiefs. of Staff is a resident associate at the
Carnegie Endowment and a contributing writer to Opinion.
UNCLASSIFar
EtiVright 2012, Los Angeles Times
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739802 STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
Date: 05/13/2015 SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045780
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739802
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
Sarah Chaves
Senior Associate
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace
1779 Massachusetts Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20036
(1.202) 939.2265
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739802
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045781"
"To you and all my former colleagues, I'm so terribly sorry. Our FSOs stand on the front lines just as surely and devotedly
as our soldiers do. Thinking of you and Pat and everyone this morning.
AM
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739909
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045245"
That is fine for me.
"Thank you for such a lovely note. Life
seems very sweet indeed this New Year's Day, and all the more so with the privilege of doing meaningful and important
work with a great team of people and a leader whom I am proud to serve. It has been quite a journey indeed, one that
has been hard at times, but immensely rewarding. Happy New Year, and here's to a great 2010.
AM"
"Below is from the Economist blogger re efforts wil EU to discredit Ashton, particularly from the French. Wouldn't hurt to
mention her positively with French interlocutors. See particularly this line: ""There is, frankly, a whiff of old boy's
network against Lady Ashton: she is not a lifetime member of the honourable guild of former foreign
ministers, and she is surrounded by men in suits who think they know a lot more about foreign policy than
she does. There is not much sympathy for her complicated family life, involving young children, and much
commuting between Brussels and Britain.""
A blog by the author of our column on the European Union
Charlemagne's notebook
. Why did Lady Ashton take the EU's foreign policy job?
• Jan 26th 2010, 22:04
NOT yet February, and the briefing against Catherine Ashton, the newly appointed EU foreign policy chief,
is getting nasty. Jean Quatremer, the Brussels blogger and well-connected EU correspondent of Liberation,
dropped another depth charge against the baroness tonight. His list of complaints against her is long, and
I have a feeling some of them are a smidgeon exaggerated. I find it hard to believe it is literally
impossible to reach Lady Ashton after eight o'clock in the evening as Mr Quatremer charges, because she
allegedly has her mobile telephones diverted to the EU situation centre (a small intelligence analysis cell
staffed by officers from national servicies) after that hour. I also have some doubts about the stress laid
on the fact that she has not yet got round to having top secret security clearance yet, so cannot see any
confidential papers. As a former British cabinet minister, and serving UK commissioner, something tells
me the British at least may share just the odd secret with her.
A senior official I saw today also made the point that any holder of Lady Ashton's post would currently be
struggling with teething problems and squabbling as the new foreign policy apparatus created by the
Lisbon Treaty takes shape. There is, frankly, a whiff of old boy's network against Lady Ashton: she is not a
lifetime member of the honourable guild of former foreign ministers, and she is surrounded by men in
suits who think they know a lot more about foreign policy than she does. There is not much sympathy for
her complicated family life, involving young children, and much commuting between Brussels and Britain.
Finally, at the risk of sounding too loyal to the British, I think Mr Quatremer is being unfair when he says
that it suits the Foreign Office in London to have Lady Ashton ""sabotage"" the post. My impression is that
aritich nnvornmpni- fPPlc I (iv Achtnn nePdc a lot of sunnort riaht now and worries she is not getting
enough support, but at the same time worries that if she receives too much help in the way of briefings
and advice from British officials, she will be seen as a British stooge. That may be a self-serving sort of
fear (because it allows the British to offer Lady Ashton lots of help) but it is real enough.
Other charges probably have something to them. They certainly chime with things I have been told by
other people.
But most damaging, to my mind, is the intimate nature of some of the briefing: this stuff is coming from
officials close to Lady Ashton, or who are senior enough to have significant contact with her. And I can
confirm from my own conversations that people across the whole EU foreign policy machine are asking the
same question: why did she take this huge job, when her instinct seems to be to make it as low key as
possible? That is a dangerous question mark to have hanging over you."
"There is a very elegant picture of you on the front page of the IHT. AM
Anne-Marie Slaughter
Director of Policy Planning
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-2972"
"I am on travel and will not return to the office until Monday, January 4, 2010. I will be reviewing e-mail intermittently. If
you need immediate assistance contact Marisa McAuliffe by phone at 202-647-2972 or email at mcauliffems@state.gov."
"Slaughter, Anne-Marie <SlaughterA©state.gov>
Thursday, February 11, 2010 9:42 AM
Sullivan, Jacob .J
A few more words on the Dalai Lama
I never heard the earlier part of this debate
We shd not use our meeting w/ the DL to beat them up, but treat it like we would treat a meeting with a Coptic leader
from Egypt or a Bahai leader from Iran, etc. We have nothing to hide. Let the Chinese make a big issue out of it if they
want to; we will just do what we have always done.
AM"
"Slaughter, Anne-Marie <SlaughterA@state.gov>
Thursday, February 11,2010 10:04 AM
Sullivan, Jacob J
One more thought on OAS
One last thought I had is whether it would be worth
AM"
I see I'm not the only person who does email while on the phone! ;-)
"Jake just downloaded with me from your conversation w/ him yesterday re the Interim Report. I just want to reassure
you that I get it completely; you saw a much earlier draft than I would have liked. I'll be working on it all weekend and
we'll make you proud. Have a good trip -- I used to be on the board of thr US-Islamic World Forum and went a couple of
times. AM"
"In keeping w/ email I sent you re my conversation w/ robert wexler and danny abraham, this speech is doing exactly what
is needed on our side. To encourage KSA and others to respond, however,"
"Pse see the Economist article below -- for their analysis not just of the human rights situation but also how to deal w/ the
Chinese. AM"
"I thought you both should hear the words of Andrew Stear, DG of policy at DFID, who told me yesterday that
""throughout the development community around the world there is great relief that the US is back, and leading
particularly in health and food security/agriculture. He said that we were once again the acknowledge ""go to people"" in
both these areas. He also had lots to say that will b v useful in QDDR re relationship b/w development and diplomacy."
"Just thought you should know that I met w/
today and he said that at the London meeting you were ""fabulous on gender issues — all the Arab
leaders didn't know what hit them."" Raising the issue matters. AM
Anne-Marie Slaughter
Director of Policy Planning
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-2972
1.4(D)
B1"
"I thought you shd know that Gen Petraeus is receiving the James Madison medal today at Princeton's alumni day as the 1
graduate alumnus who best exemplifies princeton's motto of princeton in the nation's service and the service of all 1
nations. He is enormously proud, as he shd be, to get this award. I think it would be great if you sent him an email
congratulating him. AM"
"w/o presuming on the content of the call, you might want to remember that Bildt wrote a very good op-ed after your
internet freedom speech suggesting U.S.-EU cooperation in that area; the Swedish ambassador came to see me last
week to follow up and to say that the Bildt would like to host a meeting in Stockholm on the subject that Alec would
presumably go to. If you need a sweetener of any kind, emphasizing our enthusiasm for following up on this would be
good. AM"
"We are working with Jake on some very good ideas that Bruce Jentleson has put forward, but I want to plant one idea
for you to mull."
"Happy Easter!
AM
Slaughter, Anne-Marie <SlaughterA@state.gov>
Sunday, April 4, 2010 10:07 AM
Sullivan, Jacob J; Mills, Cheryl D
On a day of easter peace ..."
I had breakfast w/ Dan this morning, who weighed in strongly and to my mind compellingly
"I hope you are having someone keep a scrapbook!
Anne-Marie Slaughter
Director of Policy Planning
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-2972"
"The way you did the ending was pitch perfect. The headlines may about the Iran language, but you laid a powerful
predicate for moving forward. AM"
"Slaughter, Anne-Marie <SlaughterA@state.gov>
Thursday, March 11, 2010 10:12 AM
Sullivan, Jacob J
AMS
Anne-Marie Slaughter
Director of Policy Planning
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-2972"
"I know that Jack gave you a verbal summary, but here is the blow by blow. Not a wonderful meeting. To me the biggest
issue concerns the role of the NSC versus State/USAID in coordinating development policy. I will send some thoughts on
a possible strategy tomorrow. Jake, Cheryl and Jack have all seen this summary and Jack has approved it. AM"
"You are the world's best boss!
AM"
"I hope that you can read this (3 pages) before your meeting with Secretary Gates on pooled funding on Monday. I have
spent a lot of time thinking about these issues in the context of the QDDR, but I think if we're going to push the position I
suggest, it has to be now. If you agree, there are a number of ways we can make this quite attractive to other agencies as
well as DoD. AM"
I checked last friday and was told it went up to you -- am checking again now. AM
I just confirmed that we sent it up on Friday and it definitely went into the line.
"B1
1.4(B)
1.4(D)
B5
Bill Luers sent me this report yesterday
07/30/2015 — Class: CONFIDENTIAL —
Reason: 1.4(B), 1.4(D) — Declassify on:
03/24/2035"
"Absolutely. That's what you have a think tank for! On a related note, while it may not be useful for Pakistan, I think we
shd find ways to work qddr briefings/discussions into our strategic dialogues w/ india and china, to talk about how we
are rethinking both diplomacy and development -- maybe also w/ South Africa. AM"
"As I mentioned last week, I was on a panel at the Brussels forum with Lady Ashton (who insisted everyone call her
Cathy), Estonian president Toomas lives, and Senator Voinovich. Ashton and I essentially reinforced each other at every
turn and presented a very positive vision of US-EU partnership. She has scored some significant victories lately, most
notably that development will be included in the European Action Service (EAS) rather than sitting at a separate desk
(the formula we are seeking rather than the DFID formula). EU defense staff will also be included in the EAS. Indeed,
Ashton chairs the European Council whenever the 27 foreign ministers, development ministers, or defense ministers
meet -- the ultimate integrated frame. She also has control over a number of the smaller development and state-
building budgets, though I gather the biggest development fund is still in dispute between her and the development
commissioner. Apparently, however, the enlargement commissioner took his cues from her on strategy and policy and
then presented his implementation plans to the Council, which is the role she wants. We should be able to build on the
way the EU is organizing in pushing pushing our own integrated frame here.
I hope everything goes well on Ottawa and NY. Bob Hormats and I will send a note on other aspects of Brussels forum,
where US was well represented. AM"
"Gates
He advances a powerful vision of integrated civilian power w/ State and USAID under you in his Foreign Affairs article. I
don't think you need to get into the State/AID details w/ him, but it wd be great to give him a heads up that you think
that the PSD as written moves toward 3 separate pillars of defense, development, and diplomacy rather than reinforcing
the integrated power frame of the Nat. Security Strategy. AM"
"Just fyi, thought you might be interested in the opening line of a pamphlet that the British policy
planning office put out on ""Better International Policy."" The Introduction, written by the
Permanent Under-Secretary of States, opens: ""The FCO is at the centre of policy making on
international issues in Whitehall. We are the experts in government at analyzing and influencing
what is happening overseas and in turning this into clear and well-judged policy advice for
Ministers.""
have sent this to Jack, Jim, Jake, and Cheryl. AM
Anne-Marie Slaughter
Director of Policy Planning
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-2972"
And the speech was excellent.
"Slaughter, Anne-Marie <SlaughterA@state.gov>
Friday, January 22, 2010 1:13 PM
H
Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J
Lady Ashton
I just want to underline how valuable and important it is for you to be building the relationship with her that you are."
"You must read this -- a Chinese blogger said that the Internet speech ""was like a song to his heart."""
"They were very grateful. Thanks.
Anne-Marie Slaughter
Director of Policy Planning
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-2972"
"You have many better things to think about this Friday night, and I hope
my 2 cents on the speech.
But let me add
Best,
AM"
"I am on travel and will not return to the office until the afternoon of June 1. I will be reviewing e-mail intermittently. If
you need immediate assistance please contact Marisa McAuliffe by phone at 202-647-2972 or email at
McauliffeM5@state.gov."
"Slaughter, Anne-Marie <SlaughterA@state.gov>
Tuesday, June 1, 2010 6:08 AM
Sullivan, Jacob J
Text of EU-Russia statement on Gaza to be issued later today
Here is the text of the statement that will be released at the EU-Russia Summit. 1.4(D)
B1
1.4(B)
""The EU and Russia regret the loss of lives during the Israeli military operation against the Flotilla sailing to Gaza. The EU
and Russia demand a full and impartial inquiry of the events and circumstances. The EU and Russia call for immediate
opening of crossings for the flow of humanitarian aid, commercial goods and people to and from Gaza."""
"From an INR report just released:
Western Europe: Publics Credit U.S. for Relief to Haiti
Britons, French, Germans, Italians, and Spaniards say the United States has done more than other countries to assist
Haiti following the devastating January earthquake. Though relief efforts in Haiti have not themselves directly impacted
opinion of the United States, the belief that the United States generally assists disaster-stricken countries does positively
affect U.S. image."
"You mentioned at Thursday's 8:45 meeting that you had talked to Qureshi and that he thought he was not going to get
any trade access to the EU. My EU contact writes that the Member States in the EU have been slowing up progress on
trade concessions to Pakistan, although the draft language negotiated w/ Pakistan still leaves room for the Commission
(which is pro-trade) to keep working on enhanced trade benefits for Pakistan. Still, the original timetable of 2011 will not
be kept. Even more ominous, any agreement will have to go to the European Parliament, which is down on Pakistan for
human rights reasons.
I have also read Esther's note to you on UN Security Council Reform. You are right that overall our best position for the
moment is
Have a good trip!
AM"
I'm planning on writing it up -- v useful for the QDDR.
"Slaughter, Anne-Marie <SlaughterA@state.gov>
Sunday, June 6,2010 11:46 AM
Sullivan, Jacob J
Fw: Washington Post ""Outlook"" Article
2010.06.06.WashPostisraeli Narrative.doc
You'll want to make sure you see this. AM"
"Your staying home tomorrow will make lots of parents at higher levels feel ok about staying home with their kids. I may
be one of them!"
FYI
"Slaughter, Anne-Marie <SlaughterA©state.gov>
Friday, June 11, 2010 4:05 PM
Sullivan, Jacob J; Mills, Cheryl D
A clarification on Turkey/Brazil
AM"
"Am passing on as requested. I will also follow up with Maura O'Neill — I have followed this up before at Amory's request.
AM"
I'm on it and will report tomorrow. AM
"Overall the speech is worth reading; if you like I'll have it put in your weekend book. 2 passages
particularly worth noting.
1. ""Across the Atlantic, Hilary Clinton has pledged to put women 'front and center' of the American development
agenda. That is the right choice. As David Cameron and Jeff Sachs argued earlier this year, women can hold the
key to development in the world's poorest countries — in education, enterprise, micro-finance and healthcare.
Investing in women pays dividends throughout the entire community.""
2. ""I see DFID as a key, joined-up, integrated department, a bright star in the Whitehall constellation, a department
of state for development in the developing world. That's why DFID has a seat at the Cabinet table and it's why I
won't be satisfied until our message rings down the corridors of each and every department in Whitehall.""
We obviously don't love the ""dept of state for development language,"" but what is most
noteworthy is his emphasis on ""joined-up"" and ""integrated"" dept — underlining the fact that
DFID as a separate cabinet department has been almost divorced from the rest of the
government.
Anne-Marie Slaughter
Director of Policy Planning
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-2972"
"I am on travel and will not return to the office until Tuesday, July 6. If you need immediate assistance please contact
Marisa McAuliffe by phone at 202-647-2972 or email at McauliffeMS@state.gov."
"See hus analysis of where we are on EAS but also on the US, Japan, and Chinese urbanization and trade patterns..
Nothing that new, but valuable coming from him.
The Australian - 19 Jun 10
Embracing everyone from the US to India Greg Sheridan, Foreign editor
GEORGE Yeo, Singapore's Foreign Minister, is one of the most dazzlingly clever people you could meet in Southeast
Asia. Singapore is a society that notoriously produces hardheads in its strategic outlook. But Yeo combines Singapore's
characteristic hard-headedness with a depth of historical understanding and context, as well as a lively human sympathy
for the diversity of the region that surrounds him, which I, at any event, find almost unique. I remember interviewing
him at the height of the East Asian economic crisis in 1997 and asking whether this crisis shattered the idea of Asia as
the growing centre of the global economy, as numerous foolishly triumphalist Western commentators were then
suggesting. ""No it doesn't,"" Yeo told me. ""At the most it might put back the forecasts by five or 10 years."" It moved the
graph a little to the right, it didn't change the trends. On that, Yeo was absolutely right.
But it is also Yeo's ability to apply the insights of history to the real problems of Asia today which make him formidable.
This week, Yeo spent a few days in Australia and I caught up with him for one of those slightly mesmerising historical
tour de force conversations in which he specialises.
It is no secret Singapore had the most serious reservations about Kevin Rudd's proposal to establish an Asia-Pacific
Community. The Prime Minister wanted the US, India and Russia included in a regional body which could deal with
strategic issues as well as trade and economics. Singapore's hesitation over the Rudd proposal came because it thought
that the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, of which it is a key member, could be sidelined. I asked Yeo whether the
region was now clear on what it wanted its organisations to accomplish. ""We still need a lot more discussion,"" he said.
""The vision is going to change dramatically, with the emergence of China and India on the global stage. The
configuration is evolving much faster than most of us would have preferred. But that's the reality we've got to work
with.
We need a regional architecture which is able to accommodate the stresses. The single most important relationship is
between the US and China. Increasingly, the relationship between India and China is becoming more important. I think
eventually a triangular relationship will decide the big issues of war and peace in Asia this century - the triangle
consisting of the US, China and India.""
Yeo saw Rudd and Foreign Minister Stephen Smith in Canberra and now describes Canberra and Singapore as being in
harmony on the evolution of regional organisations. This is how he saw it having played out: ""When Prime Minister Rudd
proposed the APC, Dick Woolcott (Rudd's envoy) went round the region. He did not visit all countries. He made it quite
plain to some that only the big countries of ASEAN need to be involved. We talked among ourselves and quite soon the
conclusion was reached that ASEAN was going to be sidelined. So there was an immediate blowback from the region.
""To PM Rudd's credit he quickly clarified this, that ASEAN is central to his conception of the APC and that that was his
vision from the very beginning. I said, 'All of us in the region are very relieved to hear that'.
""Separately we had (former Japanese) prime minister (Yukio) Hatoyama articulating his view of an East Asian region
apparently centred on China, Japan and Korea. It created, as you would expect, a natural reaction in Southeast Asia. That
got us all thinking in the region. How to keep Russia and the US in the region in a way that's comfortable. For a long time
we've been thinking about China, more recently about India."" Yeo pointed out that earlier regional organisations also
evolved slowly, in particular the East Asia Summit, which includes Australia and New Zealand, as well as ASEAN, China,
Japan, South Korea and India. He said: ""It took us a long time to create the EAS structure. Some preferred it to be based
on the ASEAN plus three (China, Japan, Korea), harking back to (former Malaysian prime minister) Mahathir
(Mohamad)'s East Asian caucus. ""Others felt that's too limiting. If it's just ASEAN plus three, that may be a little lop-sided
because of the economic weight of the plus three. So we thought if we have India on one side, and Australia and New
Zealand to the south, there's a certain natural equipoise.
""Then it took many discussions. The Russians wanted to join the EAS but we felt this should not be rushed. Russia is too
important a country. There was some unhappiness from the Russians that we did not accommodate them in the EAS at
that time. (Former US) President (George W.) Bush did not want to join the EAS but he worried that the EAS might
exclude the US from the region. We told our American friends that it could not be purely an Asian thing because
Australia and New Zealand were in it. In any case, countries like Singapore would never want an EAS to be exclusive.
What would threaten us most is if the world developed into blocs.""
So where do we end up today? ""When I met PM Rudd I thanked him for helping to catalyse the thinking of ASEAN. So
now there are two possibilities, either an EAS expanded for Russia and the US or a separate ASEAN plus eight (including
the US and Russia) configuration. In fact I had a very interesting discussion with Prime Minister Rudd. I think in the end
he's happy to let ASEAN members decide and he doesn't want to interfere in our regional discussion.""
So you can describe what Yeo outlines as either a win or a loss for Rudd. Whatever evolves, nobody is going to call it the
Asia-Pacific Community and no one is going to imagine that Rudd was its founder, as everyone accepts that Bob Hawke
founded APEC in 1989. On the other hand, it does seem as though it's very much more than likely that there will finally
be a regional organisation embracing everyone from the US to India, which is able to discuss security. That is pretty
much Rudd's policy aim and, as Yeo constructively puts it, Rudd has influenced ASEAN thinking. Friends of Rudd can
describe it as the embodiment of his vision and fulfilment of his initiative. His enemies can say the APC came to nothing
and was a failure in Australian diplomacy. Certainly Yeo casts it in a constructive light. There is only space to give the
smallest sampling of Yeo's prodigiously rich insights on other issues.
On the US, he said: ""Both Australia and Singapore feel it in our bones that the US will remain a great power for many
decades. It is a vast country always throwing up new ideas, always on the boil. It has a sunny disposition. We in
Singapore and Australia feel it in our bones that one way or another they will get out of their current difficulties.""
On China, I asked whether its political development was keeping pace with its growth in power, financial and military, so
it could manage that new power in a way that was beneficial to everybody. Yeo stressed that he was sure Beijing's
preoccupations were internal, and said: ""China is the No 1 trading partner for Japan, Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, India
and already No 2 for New Zealand, and for all the countries (in Asia) the graph points in the same direction.""
(The historical process) is high drama in China. It was historically because of the large rural peasantry that Maoism
developed as a different ideology from Bolshevism. China was 20 per cent urban. It's now 40 per cent urban and will go
to 80 per cent or 90 per cent. The urbanisation of Europe was languid by comparison, but look at Dickens or Victor Hugo.
Look at the huge reaction in Europe to urbanisation and industrialisation. In China it's all compressed. If they succeed
they will be the greatest nation on Earth. The Chinese know they have to learn new tricks. The skills which brought them
to power won't keep them in power.""
He recalled that early in China's economic modernisation program it was fascinated by how Singapore, as a mostly
Chinese nation, ran its society in such an orderly and effective manner, combining rapid economic growth with social
order and a respect for tradition. Then that interest seemed to wane. But now Chinese delegations are back again in
large numbers, fascinated particularly with how Singapore manages the politics of being a big and booming
city. Mainland Chinese are even sitting in on politicians' electoral clinics in Singapore, observing how real problems are
recognised, integrated into the system and dealt with.
I asked Yeo too whether he thought Japan could sustain the stabilising role it has played in Asia these past 60 years. He
replied: ""Their politics now are a mess. Partly because they fit the pieces together so closely, reconfiguring the pieces is-
difficult. A lot of Japanese politics now is not about fitting the pieces together but pulling them apart.
""The DP1 came to power determined to pull the pieces apart, the Liberal Democratic Party from big business from the
bureacracy. Never write Japan off. It takes a long time for them to change but when they do change they do it with a
fury and intensity that surprises everyone."" Japan has gone through profound periods of change in the past - the Meiji
Restoration of the 19th century, in which it decided to become a modern nation; or the pervasive change after World
War II, in which it decided to embrace democracy and the role of the key US ally in the region. The fact that it is now
grappling with change is no reason to think it cannot emerge again with a successful model.
Yeo is an old, old friend of Australia, and in a sense a long-term champion of Australia's involvement in Southeast Asia.
He has been a minister in the Singapore government for more than 20 years. He embodies a great deal of institutional
memory and strategic continuity, not just within Singapore but within the broader councils of the region.
It's just a pity he doesn't visit us a bit more often."
"Frank Ricciardone came to see me several weeks ago to make the case for
AM"
"Slaughter, Anne-Marie <SlaughterA©state.gov>
Thursday, May 6, 2010 7:18 PM
Sullivan, JacobJ
The political ramifications of the Greek/European debt crisis
As you know, the EU-IMF-USG consensus hope motivating the Greek bailout is that it will buy time for Spain, Portugal,
etc. From widening credit spreads to falling stock prices, most relevant market indicators are responding with doubt.
Former IMF Chief Economist and NYT Columnist (and influential blogger for bond traders) Simon Johnson has an
important rejoinder to this consensus hope in today's NYT, full text pasted below.
As the EU has no playbook for most of the pressing questions it faces, my staff is working to
brainstorm as to the least bad of what are only sobering options.
This is long but worth it.
May 6, 2010, 6:11 amIt's Not About Greece AnymoreBy PETER BOONE AND SIMON JOHNSONLouisa Gouliamaki/Agence
France-Presse — Getty Images Protesters waved flags from the Acropolis archaeological site behind banners in English
and Greek hung in front of the Parthenon temple in Athens.Peter Boone is chairman of the charity Effective Intervention
and a research associate at the Center for Economic Performance at the London School of Economics. He is also a
principal in Salute Capital Management Ltd. Simon Johnson, the former chief economist at the International Monetary
Fund, is the co-author of ""13 Bankers.""The Greek ""rescue"" package announced last weekend is dramatic, unprecedented
and far from enough to stabilize the euro zone.The Greek government and the European Union leadership, prodded by
the International Monetary Fund, are finally becoming realistic about the dire economic situation in Greece. They have
abandoned previous rounds of optimistic forecasts and have now admitted to a profoundly worse situation. This new
program calls for ""fiscal adjustments"" — cuts to the fiscal deficit, mostly through spending cuts — totaling 11 percent of
gross domestic product in 2010, 4.3 percent in 2011, and 2 percent in 2012 and 2013. The total debt-to-G.D.P. ratio
peaks at 149 percent in 2012-13 before starting a gentle glide path back down to sanity.This new program is honest
enough to show why it is unlikely to succeed.Daniel Gros, an eminent economist on euro zone issues based in Brussels,
has argued that for each 1 percent of G.D.P. decline in Greek government spending, total demand in the country falls by
2.5 percent of G.D.P. If the government reduces spending by 15 percent of G.D.P. — the initial shock to demand could
be well over 30 percent of G.D.P.Obviously this simple rule does not work with such large numbers, but it illustrates that
Greece is likely to experience a very sharp recession — and there is substantial uncertainty around how bad the
economy will get. The program announced last weekend assumes Greek G.D.P. falls by 4 percent this year, then by
another 2.6 percent in 2011, before recovering to positive growth in 2012 and beyond.Such figures seem extremely
optimistic, particularly in the face of the civil unrest now sweeping Greece and the deep hostility expressed toward
Greece in some northern European policy circles.The pattern of growth is critical because, under this program, Greece
needs to grow out of its debt problem soon. Greece's debt-to-G.D.P. ratio will be a debilitating 145 percent at the end
of 2011.Now consider putting more realistic growth figures into the I.M.F. forecast for Greece's economy — e.g., with
G.D.P. declining 12 percent in 2011, then the debt-to-G.D.P. ratio may reach 155 percent. At these levels, with a 5
percent real interest rate and no growth, the country needs a primary surplus at 8 percent of G.D.P. to keep the debt-to-
G.D.P. ratio stable. It will be nowhere near that level. The I.M.F. program has Greece running a primary budget deficit
of around 1 percent of G.D.P. in that year, and that assumes a path for Greek growth that can be regarded only as an
""upside scenario.""The politics of these implied budget surpluses remains brutal. Since most Greek debt is held abroad,
roughly 80 percent of the budget savings the Greek government makes go straight to Germans, French and other foreign
debt holders (mostly banks). If growth turns out poorly, will the Greeks be prepared for ever-tougher austerity to pay
the Germans? Even if everything goes well, Greek citizens seem unlikely to welcome this version of their ""new normal.""
Last week the European leadership panicked — very late in the day — when it realized that the euro zone itself was at
risk of a meltdown. If the euro zone proves unwilling to protect a member like Greece from default, then bond investors
will run from Portugal and Spain also — if you doubt this, study carefully the interlocking debt picture published
recently in The New York Times. Higher yields on government debt would have caused concerns about potential bank
runs in these nations, and then spread to more nations in Europe.When there is such a ""run,"" it is not clear where it
stops. In the hazy distance, Belgium, France, Austria and many others were potentially at risk.
Even the Germans cannot afford to bail out those nations.Slapped in the face by this ugly scenario, the Europeans
decided to throw everything they and the I.M.F. had at bailing out Greece. The program as announced has only a small
chance of preventing eventual Greek bankruptcy, but it may still slow or avert a dangerous spiral downward — and
enormous collateral damage — in the rest of Europe.The I.M.F. floated in some fashion an alternative scenario with a
debt restructuring, but this was rejected by both the European Union and the Greek authorities. This is not a surprise;
leading European policy makers are completely unprepared for broader problems that would follow a Greek
""restructuring,"" because markets would immediately mark down the debt (i.e., increase the yields) for Portugal, Spain,
Ireland and even Italy.The fear and panic in the face of this would be unparalleled in modern times: When the Greeks
pay only 50 percent on the face value of their debt, what should investors expect from the Portuguese and Spanish? It
all becomes arbitrary, including which countries are dragged down.Someone has to decide who should be defended and
at what cost, and the European structures are completely unsuited to this kind of tough decision-making under
pressurein the extreme downside scenario, Germany is the only obvious safe haven within the euro zone, so its
government bond yields would collapse while other governments face sharply rising yields. The euro zone would likely
not hold together.There is still a narrow escape path, without immediate debt default and the chaos that that would
produce:-
Talk down the euro — moving toward parity with the American dollar would help lift growth across the euroz one.-
As the euro falls, bond yields will rise on the euro zone periphery. This will create episodes of panic. Enough short-term
financing must be in place to support the rollover of government debt..
Once the euro has fallen a great deal, announce the European Central Bank will support the euro at those levels (i.e.,
prevent appreciation, with G-20 tacit agreement), and also support the peripheral euro zone nations viewed as solvent
by buying their bonds whenever markets are chaotic.•
At that stage, but not before, the euro zone leadership needs to push weaker governments to restructure. That will
include Greece and perhaps also Portugal. Hopefully, in this scenario Spain can muddle through.•
European banks should be recapitalized as necessary and have most of their management replaced. This is a massive
failure of euro groupthink — including most notably at the political level — but there is no question that bank executives
have not behaved responsibly in a long while and should be replaced en masse.To the extent possible, some of the
ensuing losses should be shared with bank creditors. But be careful what you wish for. The bankers are powerful for a
reason; they have built vital yet fragile structures at the heart of our economies. Dismantle with care."

"My mom just wrote me an email about the interview that captured exactly what I thought watching the interview - you
have been through so much and would have been perfectly entitled just to pack it in after the election but instead, in my
mom's words, ""instead of feeling sorry for herself she takes the ball and runs with all the energy that she can summon in
the service of her country to the limit of her body ....and she dishes it out frankly without pussy footing around whether
to heads of State or media or major international conferences."" I felt VERY proud to be on your team. AM"
Have you been dictating to the NYT?? Exactly what you have been emphasizing. AM
"For meeting with Quinn. It meant so much to him and was the perfect capstone of his year with us. See you in Shanghai.
AM"
"Great interview w/ her on cnn or msnbc where she talked about how impt it is to have a strategic and economic
dialogue and how the long term importance is less specific deliverables than increased understanding of why each side
takes the positions it does prduces good results over time --that we've seen that in the past. Given that she is a former
USTR and a Republican, it was a good plug. and you look great on CNN! AM"
"Trust your instincts re what just went on in the small group mtg. On the bus over kurt and jeff were much more
optimistic, so your sense of the overall direction of the mtg was right. Based on the conversation on the bus after the
mtg, I would ask some tough questions and don't be put off. AM"
"For your reading pleasure on the way home, S/P has been working on a project that I discussed with Jake a while back --
aimed at figuring out where we could do better and above all create more leverage to achieve our goals. The papers are
blunter than anything you would see from the bureaus -- they should not necessarily be read as policy blueprints but
rather as illustrations of alternative strategies. We have made sure that the special assistants have them on the plane. I
will also share the individual papers with the relevant assistant secretaries. We will then be happy to take the project
further if you approve.
You will be happy to know that rain has stopped at the Expo!
AM"
"B5
See below for a summary of Cathy Ashton's conversation w/ Lieberman from her policy planner.
AM"
Yes -- last draft I read several hours ago was almost there. Let me check w/ Sonni.
"Madeleine mentioned at Aspen and then called on Friday to remind me that USIP has asked her to spearhead a Track 2
dialogue with Turkey. She thinks it is a good idea; as do I. If you agree, we shd obviously check with Phil and then get
back to Madeleine. AM"
"I'm sorry -- we missed our window today. I shd have insisted we send you the draft we had as of 10 am this morning
rather than Sonni doing another round of edits so that you could have used valuable weekend time. We have a draft we
can send you now, but you should probably see it when you are fresh. Time got away from us; my apologies. AM"
"Slaughter, Anne-Marie <SlaughterA@state.gov>
Sunday, August 15, 2010 10:03 PM
Sullivan, Jacob 1; Mills, Cheryl D
A bilat w/ Cathy Ashton on DC"
"I will spare you the details of the computer disaster we suffered, which always happens at critical times, but we lost a
night of work. We are back on draft and will have a draft ready for you to engage much more closely with -- line edits etc
around noon. We will also have to send that version to WH to have any hope of making friday deadline, which is
absolutely hard. We will still b able to make changes in editing process though.
The good news is that I do think the piece is getting better and better, which is also improving the QDDR itself.
AM"
"We were aiming for a draft by the end of the day. Part of the problem is that we have also gotten detailed comments
from jack and raj, as well as v good comments from Jake, that sonni is trying to include. Lissa and I will meet as soon as
we get in and see how fast we can get you something. I know you are heading for well-deserved vacation, but cd you still
find some time to review a final draft this weekend? AM"
"I don't want to keep you hanging all evening. I will spare you the excuses; we think we can have
you something by 9:00. In some ways it's getting rougher before it's getting smoother, as we get the
top right and add examples. But it would be very good to have you engage again to make sure we
are going in the right direction. This draft also benefits from extensive comments from Jack, Raj,
and Jake. AM
Anne-Marie Slaughter
Director of Policy Planning
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-2972"
"As you have probably figured out by now, it's not ready. We were prepared to send you something rough, but it's just
not in a state where it makes sense for you to engage. I will call Jim Hoge tomorrow and get another week of need be;
Lissa is going to take over the drafting tomorrow with the aim of getting you a draft by late afternoon that you can really
take some time with; we will then take your comments Friday or Sat (if you need more time) and then not bother you
again until we have a final. I'm sorry, but it is most important that this be good.
AM"
"Jim Hoge says that he REALLY would like it by next Wed but can stretch it to next Friday — after
that it's a ""no go."" AM
Anne-Marie Slaughter
Director of Policy Planning
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-2972"
"Slaughter, Anne-Marie <SlaughterA@state.gov>
Friday, September 17, 2010 6:28 PM
Abedin, Huma; Sullivan, Jacob J
A moratorium by any other name....
I hope you get a true break this weekend; you certainly deserve it. And I am sure someone has already thought of this
idea, but on the off chance it hasn't been raised,
AM"
"I read the Roger Cohen piece and agree that it is v smart. And I've been thinking about the need for a headline/bumper
sticker for the speech. How about ""A New American Century""? We cd take on the critics directly and right up front and
make the argument this way (a lot of this is already in the intro, but wd need to be pulled together differently).
1)We live in a new age of diplomacy - we are seeing the limits of force and we face collective problems that require
bringing together a wider array of key players rather than any one nation dictating a solution. Active diplomacy is the
only option. (This is the argument david rothkopf was making to mark landler when we thought landler was doing a
profile - it resonated v well w/ landler.)
2) The U.S. is uniquely suited to lead in these circumstances. a) In situations where many nations must be brought
together that do not trust each other, we are still seen as the most honest broker. b) In situations where many nations
are sitting around the table contemplating a common problem, someone has to step forward and take responsibility for
mobilizing action (which also includes the risk of failure). We are the nation most willing to do that, both because of our
history and our values. (Here is where S can offer personal anecdotes re nations waiting for us to do something) c) in a
world of global problems, we are the most global nation, with the greatest global reach, resources, and connections.
3) We see global leadership not only as a responsibility but also as an opportunity, b/c of our native confidence,
optimism and faith that problems can be solved. We have a chance to shape a genuinely global agenda, focusing on
development as well as traditional national security issues, and mobilizing business and civil society as well as
governments. This is our time.
The speech would then go on, as it does now, to outline all the ways in which we are building relationships and solving
problems now with traditional allies and new powers on the global landscape while building a longer term architecture
of cooperation that is both truly global and adapted to solving 21st century problems.
AM"
"Wherever you are. What a great note to start your vacation on. Lissa and I had a great conversation w/ Jake tonight; the
argument is becoming clearer and clearer. I am leery of promises, but we are aiming for another draft to you before
noon on Sunday.
Have fun!
AM"
"I just want to make sure you saw this. It is the end of a piece Tony Blair did for Time this week that is adapted from his
book. It is very close to what you said on Friday. He also has a line at the beginning of the piece where he talks about
loving ""America's sense of aspiration."" AM"
"I hope you have a chance to read what I sent yesterday
And great pic in the Times today!"
I will now.
"Melanne and Maria,
I just talked to Tara Sonenshine who was with you at the global women's conference organized last
week by Laurie Fulton in Copenhagen — she said that you were both absolutely fabulous and were
the stars of the meeting. I cannot imagine being better represented.
Best,
AM
Anne-Marie Slaughter
Director of Policy Planning
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-2972"
"Attached is the final version that we sent in with all their proposed edits and our responses marked in track changes and
explained in comments. I have also included 2 additional small edits that I think will help immunize us from complaints by
the human rights/democracy crowd. If you can let me know by early tomorrow whether you approve or what you want to
change I can them make the necessary changes on the document they sent back to us and send it in my the deadline late
tomorrow. Jim Hoge likes the piece and told me that he took a personal hand in the editing. AM"
Now is good. -- really any time other than 4:30-5:15 will work. AM
"With regard to the two tops, I agree that Lissa's original top was more elegant, but Jim thought, and Jake and I agreed,
that the piece is not as compelling as it could be if we could be clearer about what you actually see coming down the
road that informs your focus on modernizing diplomacy (e.g., you see the proliferation of foundations, corporations,
ngos in the world as an opportunity, particularly given that we have more problems to deal with with the same
bandwidth, so you want to start training people now to do public private partnerships; or you see public opinion as
steadily increasing in importance, so we have to be doing public engagement in a big way). I tried to do that quickly in
the following graph, but w/o being able to draw all the connections."
"Given your recognition of the importance of procurement reform, I thought you might like to see that
USAID is getting credit for making changes already. This is both the right thing to do and getting good
press where it counts. AM
Dear Friends and Colleagues:
What if we told you a little-known bureaucratic process called ""Implementation and Procurement Reform,""
IPR for short, was one of the biggest victories for poor people in years? It means more aid can go directly
through a country's own systems, making them stronger. It also means that more aid will be administered
by local organizations who know best what their own communities need.
Through IPR, USAID is putting President Obama's recent global development policy into action. The agency
has set clear targets to increase use of local country systems and organizations, which means that US
assistance will help citizens and their governments build their own capacity, instead of setting up a parallel
system as they've done in recent years. They've set clear and ambitious targets for themselves that are
laser-focused on results, and dedicated to fighting global poverty not just in the short term, but for good.
Photo: Local organizations distribute assistance after performing a needs assessment in Bihar, India.
Ian Bray/OXFAM GB
This reform will likely be criticized by some who think that putting more money in the hands of local actors
will expose USAID's programs to more risk. But this is precisely the point; only by supporting local change
agents—both inside and outside developing country governments—can we actually strengthen the hands of
people in poor countries who are working to change their own societies for the better. That means managing
risk wisely, rather than trying to avoid it altogether. And in our field research, 36 of the 39 activists we
interviewed said they want USAID to support their government's directly, because it would make it easier for
them to hold their governments accountable and prevent corruption.
What does all this mean? It means better aid, aid that strengthens the capacity of reformers in poor countries.
And for the millions of people across the world who have been demanding these reforms, USAID has shown
it is actively listening.
Sincerely,
The Aid Effectiveness Team
p.s. If you want to hear more directly from USAID on this important policy change, RSVP today to
aideffectiveness@savechildren.org to attend ""Country Ownership: Risks & Results"" this Thursday, October
14th at 2pm, room 2255 of the Rayburn House Office Building.
Forward email
Email Marketing by
This email was sent to gadams@oxfamamerica.org by sgrundahl@oxfannamerica.orq.
Update Profile/Email Address I Instant removal with SafeUnsubscribeTm I Privacy Policy.
Oxfam America
226 Causeway Street
5th Floor
Boston, MA 02114"
"This was on the Friends of the ARC blog. Brzezinski is pushing this idea hard as well. I will have more of an update on
what is going on re a Palestine Pledge Fund and the ARC later this week. AM
Bernard Avishai urges the Obama Administration to support the Arc
on talkingpointsmemo.com
Friday, October 8, 2010 at 8:27PM
Yesterday Bernard Avishai, adjunct professor at Hebrew University, author of The Hebrew Republic, and a
former editor of the Harvard Business Review, argued in Taking Points Memo:
""If President Obama is looking for a way to excite us with an American vision for a Palestinian state--one that
can be started on even before core issues are (entirely) resolved, and which implies what is plausible about
peaceful integration with Israel and Jordan--he could do worse than publicly get behind the RAND
Corporation's ARC project.""
Avishai acknowledges that the Arc leaves some contentious issues unresolved. ""But,"" he challenges his readers,
""I defy you to watch this short video and think about the state the same way again.""
We offer the same challenge to you. Watch the video, and see if it changes the way you think about the
possibility for a viable two-state solution. If it does, join FOTA, follow us on Facebook, spread the word to
friends, and help the video go viral!
Admin Post a Comment I Share Article"
"behavior.Washington Post.doc
You almost certainly have seen this, but just in case. AM"
"Lissa is out for most of day. There is a complete draft w/ the changes u asked for that Jake has. Lissa will write through
this draft for a good line edit tonight, so it will be smoother tmw. Just let us know what u wd prefer. AM"
"I did not mean to make it seem as if Lissa is holding this up in any way — she and I have tag teamed
pretty much around the clock all week and she has been making time amid an enormous array of
important family obligations that she had set up on the assumption that she would have handed off
to Josh Daniel by now. As you know, she is indispensable. AM
Anne-Mane Slaughter
Director of Policy Planning
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-2972"
"Talks.doc
I have not been able to get a psychology dinner set up, but I have found the article that you read on
the difference an apology can make in the Middle East (coming in next email) and commissioned a
useful paper from Louise Diamond, an expert on psychology and negotiations who has done a lot
of work between the Israels and the Palestinians herself (attached). It's about 5 pages; I really think
it is worth a read. Finally, on changing the frame to look forward, I strongly recommend that you
spend 8 minutes to look at a video produced by a Rand study called The Arc, which proposes a
high-speed road/rail project connecting the key cities in the West Bank and Gaza. It is a powerful,
powerful vision of what could be, one that will play right into Bibi's emphasis on economic growth.
For my money, it would be worth a private 8 minutes screening. I will send the link in the next
email.
AM
Anne-Marie Slaughter
Director of Policy Planning
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-2972"
"For your Sunday reading, a summary of an interesting proposal by former Jordanian foreign minister Marwan Muasher.
""Palestinian-Israeli Direct Talks: The Case for a Regional Approach""By Marwan Muasher (Carnegie Endowment Bulletin,
August 2010)
Marwan Muasher – former Jordanian foreign minister, ambassador, and deputy prime minister – advocates a regional
settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, capitalizing on the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative. His approach depends first
on securing end-game ""deposits"" from all parties: The parties would offer hypothetical commitments that they might
not be willing to give at the onset, but that can be ""deposited"" with the U.S. and committed to only if the other side is
willing to do the same. Saudi Arabia's deposit, for instance, would outline and agree to a package that included details
about Jerusalem. The Saudi package would also promise to secure Arab and Muslim backing for the painful compromises
the Palestinians would need to accept.
Muasher advocates a similar approach to the Syrian track—asking Syria to deposit end-game commitments in return for
full Israeli withdrawal from the Golan Heights. In their deposits, the Saudis and the Syrians must clearly commit to
address the inclusion of Hamas and Hezbollah in any regional agreement. The Arab states would not only have to end all
logistical, financial, and military support for these two groups, but they would have to assume responsibility for
delivering these two actors, helping to transform them into political players. Israel's deposit would spell out its
commitment to a solution based on 1967 borders and a return of the Golan.
According to Muasher, these deposits would make it much easier for President Abbas to engage in talks aimed at ending
the conflict. After he has been given Arab cover, Abbas could provide his own end-game deposits. According to
Muasher, absent these commitments from the Arab states, the Palestinian positions will remain maximalist. Once the
U.S. has deposits from all sides that make for a reasonable, comprehensive package, it should put this package on the
table in cooperation with the Quartet. Once the comprehensive package is presented, the U.S. can focus on confidence-
building measures to move all sides toward the end game.
AM"
"I'm sending 2 emails today b/c I didn't send one yesterday. :-)
Attached is a one-pager fleshing out how we could launch a Pledge for Palestine based on the Warren Buffett model. If
we were to do this, we could start with which includes, in addition to
One way to go would be to ask everyone to make
conditional commitments contingent on raising a big enough sum to give the fund real impact. We also have great
contacts with a group of young Arab business leaders -- I spoke to them last year and cd quickly reach out to their chair.
We are getting details from Rand about the full cost of The ARC project.
AM"


"Here is the link to the video of The Arc. http://friendsofthearc.ore, a national infrastructure trunkline for a future
Palestinian State developed by the RAND Corporation. It is only 8 minutes long, but a great overview of the Arc vision
and its potential for enabling peace in the region. I promise you it is worth it. It has tested very well with both
Palestinians, Israelis and American Jews and Palestinians. It is a genuinely a transformational idea that did not originate
from American politicians or diplomats, but rather from innovative American minds in collaboration with stakeholders
from all walks of life in Palestine, Israel, the US, Europe, and the Muslim world. And it could be largely financed with
private finance.
AM"
"Slaughter, Anne-Marie <SlaughterA@state.gov>
Tuesday, November 23, 2010 10:29 PM
Abedin, Huma; Sullivan, Jacob J; Mills, Cheryl D
an SP memo on possible legal and nonlegal strategies re wikileaks
SP WikiLeaks doc final11.23.10.docx
Following this morning's meetings I activated my four legal eagles on the SP staff — Peter Harrell,
Jen Harris, Bill Burke White, and Catherine Powell (that includes two law profs and two Yale law
grads who certainly could be law profs). They in turn reached out to people at the Berkmann
Center at Harvard and other experts, working together with Alec Ross. Alec has been particularly
useful in terms not only of his knowledge but also his sensitivity to how anything we might try to
do could impact our own internet freedom agenda. The result is the attached memo, which has one
interesting legal approach and I think some very good suggestions about how to handle our public
diplomacy. AM
Anne-Marie Slaughter
Director of Policy Planning
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-2972"
"Slaughter, Anne-Marie <SlaughterA@state.gov>
Tuesday, November 23, 2010 11:52 PM
Abedin, Huma; Sullivan, Jacob J; Mills, Cheryl D
Chet Crocker, Scott Lasensky, and Sam Lewis OPED on MEP
Crocker Lasensky Lewis OPED.doc
I'm abusing my privileges and sending you two emails in one evening,
published yet.
November 2010
Declaring America's Stand on Middle East Peace
By Chester A. Crocker, Scott B. Lasensky and Samuel W. Lewis
Faltering Middle East peace talks need a jolt. Washington has a powerful option for moving the process forward: taking
a firm stand on how to end the conflict.
An American declaration of principles—carefully crafted and properly marketed--could spark a debate and thereby
change the political calculus for leaders. As a mediator and a world power, one of America's strongest assets is the
ability to legitimize ideas and then rally others in support. A central role for the U.S. in this conflict must be to define the
zone of negotiability.
This does not mean imposing peace. Rather, it would be a statement of the basic principles the U.S. believes can guide
the parties toward a negotiated solution. America has long declared its support for ""two states,"" but must now say more
about what that means in practice.
Even if the current talks resume, without American ideas the parties are unlikely to agree on the broad trade-offs
necessary to reach a peace deal. A quick deal on ""borders and security,"" as many have proposed, is itself unlikely
without Washington addressing the end-game. Otherwise, both sides would be too exposed on issues set for later
discussion, like Jerusalem and refugees. Opinion polling has consistently showed that support for peace is strongest
when all the core issues are addressed.
An American statement of principles would mobilize regional support. It would provide, for the first time, a public
framework for engaging sponsors of the Arab Peace Initiative. It would also strengthen our ability to reassert the
importance of a regional support structure for the bilateral negotiations, especially by reviving multilateral contacts and
meetings involving Israelis and their neighbors from throughout the region. Moreover, greater regional engagement on
the peace process can carry powerful benefits for regional challenges like the Iranian nuclear program.
A clearer U.S. declaration is also the surest way to protect prospects for a two-state solution from an unrelenting
onslaught on the ground that pushes the parties away from a peace deal. An American set of ideas would anchor
present-day demands on issues like Jerusalem, security and settlements in a clear vision of the future.
Perhaps most urgently, it would broaden the debate from the narrow confines of the settlements question.
At a minimum, the American declaration should be based on the 1967 lines, with agreed territorial swaps; support a
compromise on Jerusalem that allows for two capitals for two states; include provisions about security limitations and
guarantees; reiterate America's support for an agreed solution to the refugee problem; and reaffirm our long-standing
commitment to the State of Israel. But American principles should also include some caveat, given that our ultimate
interest is in an agreed, viable solution—not in any particular formula.
What would it take for American ideas to succeed? Unlike some past efforts, Washington should not try to 'pre-cook'
this declaration with one or more parties or to choreograph their reactions. In fact, the U.S. statement of principles
would be explicitly described as what our own country believes in and can support; and by implication cannot support.
Thus, the U.S. statement would not be designed to achieve immediate approval or adoption by the parties. Its purpose
would be to clarify where America stands, how we define our interests and what we can work for. It would aim at
influencing the climate of thinking in the region, sobering up those with illusions and encouraging those who need our
support.
Timing and context are of course key considerations. Assuming the current gridlock in negotiations persists, some time
must elapse until our election results have been digested, here and abroad, and before public attention can be
redirected toward the foreboding and increasingly dangerous Arab-Israel stalemate.
A presidential speech will then be essential to dramatize the seriousness of our purpose and to lay out the principles. It
should be immediately followed by a major, high level diplomatic effort to persuade key Middle East leaders and our
Quartet and UN allies of our genuine desire to regionalize the peacemaking effort. To maximize support from key
members of Congress, the speech should occur before Congress adjourns. No further consultation with the stalemated
parties beyond the routine should precede the speech, and leaks of its contents must be kept to an absolute minimum if
our purpose is not to be undermined.
The speech could usefully also remove some of the veil of silence that shrouds breakthroughs in past negotiations; for
example, progress in the Annapolis process.
As for the substance, in its endorsement of a two-state solution and comprehensive Arab-Israeli peace, the Obama
Administration has hinted that a Palestinian settlement should also accompany normalized relations between Israel and
the Arab states, putting a broader framing around what has traditionally been defined as a conflict between Israel and
its immediate neighbors. The normalization piece of the puzzle should be more fully articulated as part of a new strategy
based on presenting American ideas to the parties. It is a way to entice skeptical Israelis, but it also leads back to a long
overdue need for Washington to engage on the Arab Peace Initiative.
If the U.S. puts forward its own peace principles, American leadership can ensure that any diplomatic process is defined
by as clear a picture as possible of what the parties can expect to gain through a negotiated settlement, and of what
they will never gain without one.
Skeptics say it is too risky to present American ideas to the parties, that it would pull the rug out from under current
leaders, exposing them to withering domestic criticism. Others argue that it will galvanize obstructionists, not those who
support compromise, and could very well precipitate a crisis on the ground. Others simply worry about the cost to
American prestige should any of the key players react negatively. But the risks are overstated, and a complete collapse
of the process would be far more dangerous, particularly as the strategic environment shifts in favor of regional forces
that seek to undermine, rather than promote peace.
America can and must do more than limit itself to managing a conflict that has all too often upended our shared
interests in peace and stability.
END
Chester A. Crocker is Professor of Strategic Studies at the Georgetown University School of Foreign Service; Scott
Lasensky is Senior Research Associate at the U.S. Institute of Peace; Samuel W. Lewis is a retired diplomat and former
U.S. Ambassador to Israel. These views are their own."
"I am hoping you are talking about a Pledge for Palestine, but as I noted a while ago, I had also been thinking about how
he and Gates could globalize their overall Pledge campaign in a way that could help change the attitude/culture of elites
in countries like Pakistan toward greater social responsibility (starting with paying taxes). We haven't gotten that idea
fleshed out yet, but it would be worth at least raising for later follow-up.
AM"
"I'm so glad you took the time to see it. It's both practical/achievable and visionary. And I'm wondering if that stellar
group of CEOs etc that Madeleine, Walter, and Muhtar have assembled cdnt spearhead a drive to make it a reality. AM"
"Robert Pape is a top strategic thinker from U of Chicago who is best known for his empirical work showing a strong
correlation between suicide terrorism and occupation by foreign troops. In his new work he is proposing a grand strategy
of off-shore/on-shore balancing, where we keep nimble deployable military forces over the horizon and use"
"Let me try this again.
Robert Pape is a top strategic thinker from U of Chicago who is best known for his empirical work showing a strong
correlation between suicide terrorism and occupation by foreign troops. In his new work he is proposing a grand strategy
of off-shore/on-shore balancing. Below is the elevator version, or at least an academic's version of the elevator version.
What is interesting is how closely it tracks with our emphasis on civilian power and the need for a smaller military due to
budget constraints. If you want more the attached one-page proposal outlines a 3-year series of steps to apply this
proposal to Afghanistan.
""An Alternative Security Strategy. Off-shore/on-shore balancing seeks to achieve America's core national security
objectives through a combination of over-the-horizon (""off-shore"") military power and in-region (""on-shore"") economic and
political power. Off-shore/on-shore balancing is an alternative to advancing U.S. security goals through the deployment of
large ground forces overseas, already problematic and likely to become even more so as economic challenges continue
and chronic resentment deepens. Off-shore/on-shore balancing relies on naval, air, and rapidly deployable ground forces
in combination with on-site economic and political support for local partners to secure America's interests in combating
terrorism and achieving other key national security goals, particularly in the Middle East and Asia.""
AM"
We miss you!
"Slaughter, Anne-Marie <SlaughterA@state.gov>
Monday, November 29, 2010 11:31 AM
Abedin, Huma; Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J
A Foreign Policy 100 top global thinkers plug for the QDDR
For a tiny bit of good news in such a bleak week, you and President Clinton came in at no. 13 in
Foreign Policy's second annual list of top global thinkers, with special commendation to you for
launching the QDDR (and for cookstoves and women's rights, as well as for your strong position
on American leadership). Michele Flournoy and I also tied for no. 74 on the basis of our respective
roles in the QDR and other reviews at DoD and the QDDR here at State. Here are the write ups
13. Bill and Hillary Rodham Clinton
for proving that you don't need to be president to act presidential.
FORMER PRESIDENT I NEW YORK
SECRETARY OF STATE I WASHINGTON
Speaking to the Council on Foreign Relations in September, Hillary Rodham Clinton sounded a confident note:
""After years of war and uncertainty, people are wondering what the future holds, at home and abroad. So let me say
it clearly: The United States can, must, and will lead in this new century.""
Ironically, two of the people most crucial to the new global century are the Clintons themselves: the ex-president and
the ex-would-be-president, the power couple now defined by their position just outside the highest reaches of power.
Except that, these days, both Clintons are more influential, and more beloved, than ever. Bill's Clinton Global
Initiative is starting to feel like a sexier, more effective competitor not just to Davos but to the United Nations itself,
bringing world leaders together to commit their resources to fighting poverty with market-based, technocratic
solutions. As of this summer, his foundation had contributed $23 million and countless man-hours to the effort to
rebuild Haiti. Polls have shown he's a better advocate for Democratic candidates than the actual president, and he
spent most of the fall stumping for woebegone Dems from Orlando to Seattle.
Meanwhile, Hillary showed up in one recent poll as the most popular political figure in the United States, an
accolade she has earned through a no-drama approach to an array of thankless tasks: brushing off Vladimir Putin's
temper tantrum to reach agreement on nuclear disarmament and Iran sanctions, promoting women's rights over the
objections of entrenched traditionalists, and launching an innovative effort to bring clean cookstoves to the world's
poorest. But what she has mainly stood for is American competence, with her Quadrennial Diplomacy and
Development Review a major, if unglamorous step toward making U.S. statesmanship a more agile beast. If this is
what Clinton nostalgia looks like, bring it on.
74. Michele Flournoy and Anne-Marie Slaughter
for setting the tone of how the United States engages with the world.
POLICY PLANNING CHIEFS, DEFENSE AND STATE DEPARTMENTS I WASHINGTON
Barack Obama campaigned in 2008 on the promise of changing not just the style but the substance of how the
United States deals with its allies and enemies abroad, and the job of figuring out how to enact the changes fell
largely to two people in particular. At the State Department, Anne-Marie Slaughter, director of policy planning, is
spearheading the department's Quadrennial Diplomacy and Development Review. The review aims to rejuvenate
marginalized civilian agencies such as the U.S. Agency for International Development, preparing for a world in
which America's worst threats are not great-power rivals but the upheavals associated with failed and failing states.
Slaughter's Pentagon counterpart is Undersecretary for Policy Michele Flournoy, co-founder of the Center for a New
American Security think tank, who articulated a vision for a new Democratic realism in foreign policy that both
candidates Hillary Clinton and Obama embraced in the 2008 election. In 2010 she oversaw the Pentagon's own
quadrennial review, a blueprint that cuts back on big-ticket weapons systems and focuses instead on the immediate
needs posed by today's asymmetrical conflicts. Flournoy has also been a vocal advocate for Obama's Afghanistan
strategy, albeit a pragmatic one: ""I don't want to suggest that achieving success will be simple or easy,"" she told
the Senate in February. ""We need to prepare for the possibility that things may get harder before they get better.""
Anne-Marie Slaughter
Director of Policy Planning
U.S. Dept(silent of State
(202) 647-2972"
"Here is a quite different picture of the Middle East — and an example of our leading in a different way. NB also the
woman entrepreneur from Dubai. AM"
"Slaughter, Anne-Marie <SlaughterA@state.gov>
Monday, November 29, 2010 5:10 PM
Abedin, Huma; Reines, Philippe I; Mills, Cheryl D
FW: Well done
See below — a completely unsolicited response to your statement today from Allison Stanger — she is the woman you
met last year who wrote the book about contracting. Congrats to all who worked on it. AM"
"You were great this morning, truly. And your instincts on the speech were just right. I was very proud to be in the front
row. I am also enormously pleased that in the last 2 months we have gotten a major speech and a Foreign Affairs article
done with a lot of people working very well as a team -- exactly as it ought to be. That is a tribute to top-level
management and our ability to learn from experience and make improvements. It's a team I will be all the more sorry to
leave. But now for the QDDR I'll be home for the rest of the week writing hard
file're going to get there -- cheryl taking hold has, as usual, been a huge help.
AM"
"Is one of the top five stories on Real Clear World, a site that collects most important things to read, under headline
""Hillary on Top of U.S. Foreign Policy."" And the full speech is also a link on Real Clear World.
I freely admit that I'm procrastinating from QDDR writing by surfing the web .... AM"

"set of working papers
_final.doc; Ten Lessons for 2010 Jinal.pdf
We asked Dan Kurtzer and Scott Lasensky to boil down 10 key lessons from the big book of working papers that Sandy
and Steve's USIP task force has produced. They are attached. I think the most useful lessons are #3 re the process is not
an end in itself but an opportunity to put forward substantive proposals; #4 re avoiding incrementalism and developing
a regional strategy, and #7 on making sure we have a backroom operation to work through all the strategic dimensions
of possible bridging proposals.
AM"
"I don't know if you had time to read the longer paper from Louise Diamond that I sent you, but here she has boiled
down her basic arguments into 700 words."

"And your answer to the question about your proudest achievement made all the work on the qddr worth it!
AM"
Attached is a strategy memo --
"I thought that you might enjoy this by our newest S/P member, who was a journalist for the Wall Street Journalist and
other places before she joined us in September. She is on an International Affairs Fellowship from the Council on Foreign
Relations. They asked her to write the following; it was cleared by L. It is quite profound.
By EMILY PARKER
In 2007 I flew down to Lima to interview Mario Vargas Llosa for this newspaper. We talked in his elegant home,
surrounded by thousands of books. Mr. Vargas Llosa offered me a glass of red wine. Then he proceeded to
discuss why he believes that literature can change the world.
Mr. Vargas Llosa's Nobel Prize is a great victory—and not just for a talented and prolific author. His work is
perhaps the greatest rebuttal to those who believe that literature exists on the periphery of history and politics,
or who claim that they have ""no time"" for fiction.
In a New Republic essay in 2001, Mr. Vargas Llosa argued for granting literature ""an important place in the life
of nations."" He wrote, 'Without it, the critical mind, which is the real engine of historical change and the best
protector of liberty, would suffer an irreparable loss.""
Mr. Vargas Llosa's novels reflect his deep, personal hatred of dictatorships and his staunch belief in the value
of individual liberty. He is hardly the only novelist to have shed light on these themes, but I would argue that he
is among the most successful.
Columnist Mary Anastasia O'Grady on the anti-Communist Peruvian writer.
A case in point is ""Conversation in the Cathedral,"" the work that Mr. Vargas Llosa has said he would rescue
first from a fire. The novel is set in Peru, in the dark days of the Manuel Odria dictatorship of the 1950s, which
is when Mr. Vargas Llosa grew up. He told me that this was the book in which he wanted to describe how
dictatorships impregnate ""every act of life.""
To demonstrate this, Mr. Vargas Llosa paints around Odria rather than confronting him outright. The book
opens with a grim landscape of ""uneven and faded buildings"" and describes ""dull and defeated eyes at the
tables of Zela bar, hands that reach for ashtrays and glasses of beer."" The narrative, which rapidly jumps from
past to present, describes a stalled, confused world. You don't know who to trust.
Mr. Vargas Llosa attacks politics more openly in ""The Feast of the Goat,"" which explicitly details the horrors of
the Trujillo regime in the Dominican Republic. Rafael Trujillo was notorious for his victimization of women, and
so we see life under his rule through the eyes of one young girl unlucky enough to have crossed his path. ""The
woman is almost always the first victim of a dictatorship,"" Mr. Vargas Llosa told me.
For some, Mr. Vargas Llosa's victory will be controversial because of his political background and his
outspoken views. He unsuccessfully ran for president of Peru in 1990, losing to Alberto Fujimori. During the
campaign Mr. Vargas Llosa gained notoriety for his emphasis on a market economy, free trade and private
property. He was no less controversial for his support of the invasion of Iraq, which he saw as necessary to
ending what he called the ""monstrous dictatorship"" of Saddam Hussein.
Mr. Vargas Llosa has now left politics, and he believes that he can better shape the world with his pen. Or as
he told me in Lima: 'Through writing, one can change history.""
Not all of his work is dark. ""Aunt Julia and the Scriptwriter"" is punctuated with humor, and 'The Bad Girl,"" about
one man's world-wide pursuit of an elusive lover, is a thoroughly entertaining read. The one constant is a
perceptive and empathetic glimpse into a wide range of human experience.
As Mr. Vargas Llosa wrote in his 2001 essay about literature, ""Nothing better protects a human being against
the stupidity of prejudice, racism, religious or political sectarianism, and exclusivist nationalism than this truth
that invariably appears in great literature: that men and women of all nations and places are essentially equal.""
Ms. Parker is an international affairs fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations."
"To take your mind off the Balkans for a second, see below — a great plug for our global entrepreneurship program, which
Lorraine Hariton and Steve Koltai are running. I commissioned a memo last week from Greg Behrman on S/P as to how
we could pull the various different entrepreneurship efforts/initiatives that are part of MEPI, post-Cairo follow up etc.
into something bigger under the Global Entrepreneurship Program umbrella; we will have it for you when you get back.
AM"
"I know I'm not supposed to lift my head from the QDDR, but just thought you would like to see this — it's for all the ideas
you wanted promoted when you picked me. AM
The Crossroads Nation
By DAVID BROOKS
Bill Clinton used to talk about building a bridge to the 21st century. President Obama talks about laying down a ""new foundation."" But
Clinton was always vague about what the land on the other side of that bridge was going to look like, and Obama is vague about what
edifice is going to go on top of that foundation.
They are vague because nobody is clear about what sort of country America is going to be in 2030 or 2050. Nobody has quite defined
America's coming economic identity.
In thinking about this question, it probably helps to start at the beginning. Five hundred years ago, agriculture was the major economic
activity. One hundred years ago, it was industrial production. Now, of course, we're living in an information age. Innovation and
creativity are the engines of economic growth.
Howard Gardner of Harvard once put together a composite picture of the extraordinarily creative person: She comes from a little place
somewhat removed from the center of power and influence. As an adolescent, she feels herself outgrowing her own small circle. She
moves to a metropolis and finds a group of people who share her passions and interests. She gets involved with a team to create
something amazing.
Then, at some point, she finds her own problem, which is related to and yet different from the problems that concern others in her
group. She breaks off and struggles and finally emerges with some new thing. She brings it back to her circle. It is tested, refined and
improved.
The main point in this composite story is that creativity is not a solitary process. It happens within networks. It happens when talented
people get together, when idea systems and mentalities merge.
Now imagine you are this creative person in the year 2010, 2025 or 2050. You are living in some small town in Ukraine or Kenya or
some other place, foreign or domestic. You long to break out and go to a place where people are gathering to think about the things you
are thinking about, creating the things you want to create.
If you are passionate about fashion, maybe you will go to Paris. If it's engineering, maybe it'll be Germany. But if you are passionate
about many other spheres, I suspect you'll want to be in America.
You'll want to be in the U.S. because English has become the global language. You'll want to come because American universities lead
the world in research and draw many of the best minds from all corners of the earth.
You'll want to be there because American institutions are relatively free from corruption. Intellectual property is protected. Huge
venture capital funds already exist.
Moreover, the United States is a universal nation. There are already people there with connections all over the world. A nation of
immigrants is more permeable than say, Chinese society.
You also observe that America hosts the right kind of networks — ones that are flexible and intense. Study after study suggests that
America is one of those societies with high social trust. Americans build large, efficient organizations that are not bound by the circles of
kinship and clan. Study after study finds that Americans are not hierarchical. American children are raised to challenge their parents.
American underlings are relatively free to challenge their bosses. In this country you're less likely to have to submit to authority.
From this story you can see that economic power in the 21st century is not going to look like economic power in the 20th century. The
crucial fact about the new epoch is that creativity needs hubs. Information networks need junction points. The nation that can make
itself the crossroads to the world will have tremendous economic and political power.
In 2009, Anne-Marie Slaughter, now director of policy planning at the State Department, wrote an essay for Foreign Affairs in which
she laid out the logic of this new situation: ""In a networked world, the issue is no longer relative power, but centrality in an increasingly
dense global web.""
Slaughter's essay was titled ""America's Edge."" That is apt. Americans are now in a depressed state of mind. As China and India rise,
nearly two-thirds of Americans believe their nation is in decline.
In fact, the U.S. is well situated to be the crossroads nation. It is well situated to be the center of global networks and to nurture the right
kinds of networks. Building that America means doing everything possible to thicken connections: finance research to attract scientists;
improve infrastructure to ease travel; fix immigration to funnel talent; reform taxes to attract superstars; make study abroad a rite of
passage for college students; take advantage of the millions of veterans who have served overseas.
The nation with the thickest and most expansive networks will define the age. There's no reason to be pessimistic about that."
"Cc: Mills, Cheryl D; Abedin, Huma
I Subject: New
I have given this a great deal of thought.
AM"
You will'enjoy this - the senate democratic communications center sent it out today. AM
This is an major achievement, and an even greater disaster averted. AM
"All the women I talked to afterwards from State had the same reaction; you make us SO proud.
AM
Anne-Marie Slaughter
Director of Policy Planning
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-2972"
AM
I thought you would like to see this. AM
"In your book tonight, as Tab 4 of the materials for the USGLC event, is a list I put together of all the key things you said in
your CGD speech and the parallel language in the PPD. It is really worth skimming; it shows at a glance how you set the
agenda and won the day. As the Secretary who came in determined to elevate development, you have a great deal to
take credit for in launching the first national development policy. And as my PPD staff briefings with Gayle on the Hill
today demonstrated, the PPD sets the table beautifully for the QDDR.
AM"
"You hit it out of the park! Really, you touched on every point and set the stage perfectly for the QDDR. Now we just have
to deliver, and we will."
"Jake probably passed this on to you, but just in case, I think it's definitely worth reading
A few comments from one of my staff members who has long experience with
the Middle East follow.
From Martin: The principle conclusion from a quick visit to Israel and Ramallah over the weekend is that
Netanyahu is in a strong position politically, with an unusually stable ruling coalition. Nobody I spoke with
believed that the government would have fallen if he had decided to extend the settlement freeze before its
expiry, as a gesture to U.S. peacemaking efforts. In their view, he could have easily garnered the support of a
large majority of the people, for whom the settlers are a marginal concern. And this would have given him
leverage over his ministers to ensure their support or abstention in the cabinet. As Dan Meridor noted, Likud
voters are to the left of their Knesset members when it comes to peacemaking (70 percent support the two-state
solution, vs only 50 percent of the leadership).
Lieberman, not the Likud, is Bibi's chief concern. He wants to keep him in the government for as long as
possible for fear that when he leaves he will garner the support of those on the right, including from the Likud,
who oppose peacemaking. For the time being, Bibi uses the threat of an alternative coalition with Kadima to
keep Lieberman in the tent. But the clock is ticking. According to Tzipi Livni, she can bring her party into the
government now, and is willing to do so without any demand for ""rotation,"" provided Bibi is serious about
negotiating peace. But as the elections grow closer, more and more of her party members are turning against
the idea of joining the government. They are strengthened in their views by recent internal polling which shows
Kadima with 32 seats (up from 28 now), Likud slightly down at 25, and Labor at only 5.
Therefore, if Bibi intends to make a deal with Abu Mazen, he will need to do so sooner rather than later. The
longer he waits, the less leverage he has on Lieberman and the more likely Lieberman will break away to
oppose him in the next elections.
In this context, Bibi's negotiating tactics become self-defeating. Believing that he is a great negotiator, and that
he is operating in the Middle East bazaar, he inflates his requirements well beyond anything reasonable in the
belief that this is the best way to secure the highest price. The process of bringing him down to a reasonable
price uses up a lot of energy, uses up a lot of goodwill, humiliates his Palestinian negotiating partner, and raises
doubts about his seriousness. In the end, under great pressure from all quarters, he will make the final
concession, but only after wasting a lot of time, making everybody furious with him, and thereby securing no
credit either with his supporters or negotiating partners. At heart, he seems to lack a generosity of spirit. This
combines with his legendary fear of being seen as a ""freier"" (sucker) in front of his people to create a real
problem in the negotiations, especially because he holds most of the cards.
This is further complicated by his introduction of the notion of ""creative ideas."" Thinking out of the box, as he
likes to do, will only further delay the negotiations because the box is already well-defined. To attempt to
broaden the parameters will generate mistrust of his intentions on the Palestinian side just when direct
negotiations provide the opportunity to build trust.
The reason for dwelling on Bibi's psychology rather than his politics is that the latter all point in the direction of
making a deal: the Israeli public is ready to get on with it; if Israel doesn't make a serious move, it will further
delegitimize its standing internationally (something Bibi is deeply concerned about); Bibi needs President
Obama in his corner to deal with the threat from Iran and to avoid punishment by the voters for mishandling
relations with the U.S.; and if he doesn't make the deal with Abu Mazen now, he will have helped to advance
the future he is most concerned about - a llamas takeover of the Palestinian leadership.
Yuval Diskin was quite clear about this latter point. After praising the Palestinian security services to the sky
(unusual for him) he told me that he had warned Bibi that at the moment they have a high motivation to prevent
terror because they believe they are building their state. If that proves to be an illusion, the motivation will
disappear and then he cannot guarantee security in the West Bank. He considers it quite possible that if Bibi
doesn't quickly demonstrate his seriousness to Abu Mazen, he will resign because his honor has now been
seriously damaged. He told Bibi that he cannot predict who will lead the Palestinians if Abu Mazen resigns, but
that Salam Fayyad will likely have to go too.
What is to be done? I have no magic solution for what must be a deeply frustrating exercise for you. And
please forgive me if what I recommend here is just repeating what you already know.
1.Put your arm around Bibi: he still thinks we are out to bring him down. There is no substitute for working
with him, even though he makes it such a frustrating process. But the purpose of embracing him is to nudge
him forward, not to buy into his exaggerated political fears or accept his inflated demands.
2. Try to find a way to make him understand that his negotiating tactics are counterproductive to his own
purposes. The Obama Administration has done a great deal lately to underscore its concern for Israel's security,
from the vote at the IAEA, to the sanctions on Iran, to the letter that Obama was willing to sign that accepted
Bibi's security requirements. That should buy you credibility with him.
3. As his friend, paint a realistic picture of the strategic consequences of his negotiating tactics, particularly in
terms of what is likely to happen to the PA leadership if he worries only about his politics and not at all about
Abu Mazen's politics.
4. If all else fails, avoid recriminations in favor of a ""clarifying moment."" The world will of course blame
Bibi. But you should avoid any kind of finger-pointing in favor of a repeated commitment to a negotiated
solution and a willingness to engage with both sides in trying to make that happen, when they're ready. The
Israeli public and the American Jewish Community should know how far the President was prepared to go and
they should be allowed to draw their own conclusions. Bibi, Abu Mazen, and the Arab states need negotiations
and time is not on the side of any of them. They will come back to the table sooner rather than later as long as
we keep the door open.
From my staffer:
AM
Anne-Marie Slaughter
Director of Policy Planning
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-2972"
"Aftachments: DiplomacyChapter10 24 10 final 3 pm.doc; Development_Chapter_10_22_10 CLEAN.doc;
QDDR_Chapter 3_Crisis_Conflictand_Instability_102210_final clean.doc; Working
smarter 10 24 10 final.doc; DiplomacyChapter10 24 10 final 3 pm.doc;
Development_Chapter 10_22_10 CLEAN.doc; QDDR_Chapter 3
_Crisis_Conflictand_Instability_102210_final clean.doc; Working smarter 10 24 10
final.doc
With prodigious efforts by your entire team (Jeanne, Dana, and Ed Meier worked very hard with Pat and his people over
the past week on the last chapter in addition to Bill, Karen, both Jim and Don Steinberg and others at both State and
USAID), greatly aided by spectacular thinking and all-night editing from Jake, here are a much improved four chapters.
Among other things, the 4th chapter now showcases much of the great work jack and his team have already done.
In the final report we will have
1.An introductory 1-2 page letter from you
2. An exec summary (10-15 pp that can be read in lieu of entire doc)
3. An introduction framing the chapters in terms of leading thru civilian power;
4. A chapter on the global trends and policies driving our assessment of the capabilities we need (written but not yet
edited):
5. the attached 4 chapters;
6. a final chapter on the National Security Budget;
7. A conclusion.
With the edits/cuts this week we are on track to come in some 5,000-10,000 words shorter than the QDR.
We're working this week on roll-out strategies of every kind, as well as further revisions to fill holes and respond to your
and other comments.
Happy reading!
AM"
"Eco.docx- 25Nov2010.doc
This is a very thoughtful piece that identifies many of the same factors we are in our diplomatic chapter (and that is not
just because the author – the former Bangladesh ambassador to the US—cites me). What is most striking is that it
affirms that our analysis in the QDDR offers a set of questions that foreign ministries all over the world are grappling
with. I had hoped to have time to do some traveling to broadcast the QDDR to key allies and partners around the world
after the QDDR is in, but even if that can't happen, we will devise an outreach strategy re sending the report out to
foreign ministers around the world and to our ambassadors that will greatly amplify its impact. AM"
Happy Birthday! An early QDDR return. AM
"I just want to say that as I brief the QDDR (20 times and counting), one of the points that makes
the strongest impression, and that I frankly think is an enormous part of your intellectual and
practical legacy, is putting together all the bureaus that focus on protecting individuals — protecting
them from insurgent or criminal violence (CCO and INL), protecting their rights through law
(DRL, GTIP, S/WCI), or meeting their basic needs in humanitarian emergencies (PRM). It is a
major statement about the direction that the world is going and we must follow. This was really
your idea, and it is a powerful one. I know your decision today and applaud it. AM
Anne-Marie Slaughter
Director of Policy Planning
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-2972"
"I will be at a USGLC breakfast doing qddr so won't be at morning meeting. You will see speech, which is very hard to
write given magnitude of report coupled w/ own hall setting. We have aimed it really at press, to try to focus them as
precisely as possible in what we want their stories to be, so it's important to get those key message out. But I would just
urge you also to speak from the heart -- you know what this is reallly about better than anyone and if your passion for
making this happen and commitment to getting it done come through, it will frame the entire exercise. This is your only
chance to speak to the press about 14 months of work until we relaunch in January. There is too much going on to make
headlines, but we want there to be positive press saying you are ahead of the curve (and the new Congress) in making
govt work better. AM"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
48;"Madam Secretary, here is our latest draft of Friday's speech. It's long — about 30 minutes in this version — but if
you're comfortable with the general direction we'll streamline it.
Thanks
Dan
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739661
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045603
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739661
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
SECRETARY OF STATE HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON
REMARKS ON THE MAGHREB IN TRANSITION
AT THE CENTER FOR STRATEGIC AND INTERNATIONAL STUDIES
WASHINGTON, DC
OCMBER 12, 2012
B5
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739661
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045604
B5
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739661
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739661
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045605
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739661
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
B5
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739661
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045606
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739661
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
B5
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739661
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045607
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739661
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
B5
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739661
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045608
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739661
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
B5
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739661
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045609
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739661
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
B5
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739661
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045610
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739661
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
B5
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739661
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045611
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739661
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
B5
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739661
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045612
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739661
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
B5
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739661
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045613
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739661
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
B5
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739661
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045614
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739661
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
B5
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739661
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045615"
48;"Here is a new version with the alternative ending and our other edits.
Dan"
48;"Philippe and Jake asked me to send along this response to the Washington Post editorial:
By Michael Posner
The Post's Dec. 27 editorial (""Redefining Human Rights"") on the Obama Administration's human rights and
democracy policies, and Secretary Clinton's recent speech at Georgetown in particular, misses the critical point:
human rights, democracy, and development are mutually reinforcing, not competing goals. They complement
each other in the task of making human rights a human reality.
President Roosevelt understood the fundamental link between liberty, prosperity and security, tying together
freedom of speech and worship with freedom from want and freedom from fear in his famous ""Four Freedoms""
speech. At Georgetown, Secretary Clinton articulated a 21st century vision grounded in this wisdom.
To accuse Secretary Clinton of embracing a Soviet-bloc approach to human rights because she includes
development in a discussion of democracy not only strains the bonds of credulity and common sense, it also
walls off a crucial avenue for ensuring that people can actually exercise the rights that are naturally theirs -
including the rights to freedom of religion, association, and speech-in their daily lives.
As Secretary Clinton made clear, policies that address development alone are not adequate: ""Freedom doesn't
come in half measures, and partial remedies will not solve the whole problem,"" she said. But experience shows
us that where broad-based development occurs, people are more likely to demand a say in securing their futures,
and governments are more likely to have the resources to maintain the strong institutions, including reliable
police and fair courts, that help ensure the consistent protection of rights. Where people are given the right to
speak freely, to participate in their nation's political process and have access to basic information about
government, sustainable development is more likely to occur. At the same time, democracies without
development do not last. These are mutually reinforcing tracks, and the Obama Administration is committed to
pursuing both simultaneously.
As President Obama said in his Nobel lecture, ""engagement with repressive regimes lacks the satisfying purity
of indignation."" But the Post's overheated outrage ignores the lessons learned by generations of men and women
who worked to advance human rights around the world.
To suggest that Secretary Clinton somehow provided excuses to rights-abusing dictators in a speech in which
she forcefully criticized specific abuses across the world, is simply not credible. Far from being an excuse for
any regime, this is an approach that pushes governments to do more to advance civil and political rights and to
ensure that democracy actually delivers a measure of prosperity and opportunity for all. That is the right
approach for the Obama Administration and for the 21st century.
###"
48;Great. We're reaching out to them now.
48;"Here's some background: This piece is for a year-ending look-ahead issue of The Economist and we were asked to write
about America's priorities and place in the world in 2011, ten years after 9/11 and twenty years after the end of the Cold
War. The team (Jake, Josh, Anne-Marie, Derek) felt that this was a good opportunity to pull together for a wide audience
some of the key themes you sounded in Krakow and elsewhere, and build on the President's call to action at UNGA. We
don't say anything new here, its true, but the idea was to lay down another marker that these are issues that are
important to you and to the administration."
48;"Thank you, we'll make that change.
Dan"
48;"Madame Secretary, passing along a statement on Aung San Suu Kyi for your review.
Thanks
Dan
STATEMENT BY SECRETARY CLINTON
Release of Aung San Suu Kyl
Today I join with billions of people around the world to welcome the long-overdue release of Burmese democracy leader
and Nobel Peace Prize Laureate Aung San Suu Kyi from house arrest.
Aung San Suu Kyi has endured enormous personal sacrifice in her peaceful struggle to bring democracy and human
rights to Burma, including unjustified detention for most of the past twenty years. The Burmese regime has repeatedly
rejected her offers to engage in dialogue and work together, trying instead to silence and isolate her. Through it all,
Aung San Suu Kyi's commitment to the Burmese people has not wavered.
The United States calls on Burma's leaders to ensure that Aung San Suu Kyi's release is unconditional so that she may
travel, associate with her fellow citizens, express her views, and participate in political activities without restriction. They
should also immediately and unconditionally release all of Burma's 2,100 political prisoners.
We urge Burma's leaders to break from their repressive policies and begin an inclusive dialogue with Aung San Suu Kyi
and other democratic and ethnic leaders towards national reconciliation and a more peaceful, prosperous, and
democratic future.
###"
48;"Madame Secretary, we have drafted a statement on the 9/11 health bill with help from Chris Falvo, Miguel, and
Ann Gavaghan. Passing it along for your review.
Thanks
Dan
###
This email is UNCLASSIFIED."
48;"Madame Secretary, I wanted to flag for you that we have just sent Huma a new draft of your town hall speech that
reflects considerable changes over night from Anne-Marie and others. We are continuing to polish it but wanted you to
have a chance to see its new direction.
Dan"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
77;"I asked to attend your svtc today with Embassy Tripoli, because had first met so many of that staff when I went with
you from Malta to Tripoli for the reopening of our Embassy.
Today's deaths hit me much harder than I would have guessed. I am always proud to serve under you, but never have
your words been more meaningful than on today's svtc. Every day of your tenure has been extraordinary, but none
more so than today. Thank you again for your inspirational leadership and example.
As ever,
Harold
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739571
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045269"
77;
77;Independent Fact-Finding Committee>
77;"Importance: High
ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE/ATTORNEY WORK-PRODUCT
And Happy New Year to you (and your family) too! I am so thrilled to be in this job and working with you. I am having a
great time, and hope to have an even better 2010.
Re Blackwater. I have already put these very questions to our team, and they are working up a memo on the subject.
Significantly, the press accounts are all saying that State Department lawyers appropriately warned the DOJ prosecutors,
but that the DOJ lawyers chose to take a different route.
My initial reactions to your questions are as follows:
I will keep pressing and give you an oral report at Monday's 8:45, and we can get the promised memo to you soon
thereafter.
Please let me know if you need more.
Best
Harold
For"
77;"ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE/ATTORNEY WORK-PRODUCT
Ok. Will do."
77;"Will happily do. The French Legal adviser Edwidge Belliard was very excited to meet you at lunch in DC a few months ago
and I just saw her in the Hague on Wed. So Jeff--will stand by for your instructions Harold Harold Hongju Koh The Legal
Adviser U.S. Department of State Suite 6421
2201 C St. NW
Washington, DC 20520-6421
202 647 9598 office
202 647 7096 fax"
77;"Madame Secretary:
Pardon the early morning email, but I am responding to your invitation to send you our thoughts on Haiti. You
probably have already had all the thoughts below, but I wanted to put mine in writing. First, and most
important, thanks for what you have done thus far, which has been remarkable. One week in, we have reacted
most admirably to the Haiti crisis. State and AID are firmly in the lead; you, Cheryl, Raj, and Jake have done a
heroic job; and the most urgent humanitarian challenges seem in hand. Although I have not participated in
many of the departmental conversations about Haiti, based on my years thinking about that country. I wanted to
offer suggestions that might prove helpful on the next round of interrelated challenges:
, —
Best,
Harold
Harold Hon61.1 Koh"
77;"Importance: High
Madame Secretary:
You have asked about the USG's options regarding the 10 Amcits from Idaho in Haiti, from the New Life
Children's Refuge, who are currently being charged with child abduction and criminal association crimes under
Haitian law. Depending on the GOH' s intent, we believe the USG would have the following basic options:
Please let us know if you need more information, and especially if you would like us to contact DOJ to
inquire further."
77;"Madame Secretary:
On flight home from Kampala, which was exhausting
Monday, but whatever you hear, the big picture is this:
I am sending Info memo B5
To become operational, any crimes of aggression
1. must still be affirmatively revoted by two thirds votes of states parties
2 no earlier than 2017
3 there will be another review conf probably before this goes into effect 4of the two ways of referring crime one goes
through an exclusive sc trigger;
5 the other branch has
A a prior sc filter *and*
B an ex post sc red light plus
C requires full vote of 9 judges of pretrial division and D nonconsenting aggressor states can opt out and E prosecutor
must have reasonable basis for investigation under definition which F has now been significantly narrowed
I can elaborate Monday
Best
Harold
Harold Hongju Koh
The Legal Adviser
U.S. Department of State
Suite 6421
2201 C St. NW
Washington, DC 20520-6421
202 647 9598 office"
77;"Not a day goes by that I am not thankful for the chance you've given to me to work on issues that mean so much to me. I
am so proud to work for you.
But never was this more so than this week, when amid everything else, you stood up courageously for principle on 686.
Our voice did not prevail, but it was heard, and everyone in my office who worked on this was so very proud that we
have a great leader of conscience as our Secretary.
Happy Thanksgiving to your whole family.
With thanks and respect,
Harold
Harold Hongju Koh
The Legal Adviser
U.S. Department of State
Suite 6421
2201 C St. NW
Washington, DC 20520-6421
202 647 9598 office
mobile
202 647 7096 fax"
77;"Thank you and your wonderful family
Harold Hongju Koh
The Legal Adviser
U.S. Department of State
Suite 6421
2201 C St. NW
Washington, DC 20520-6421
202 647 9598 office
mobile
202 647 7096 fax"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
191;"Thought some more after our conversatiion and have something to discuss that might be useful.
Call when you have a chance.
Sandy -
This is written from my BlackBerry."
191;"HRC: Back this morning from Asia.
Congratulations on the speech. I think it came out great. And the reaction I have heard today has been very
positive.
Let raise an idea about how you could present the arrangement on settlements that you are seeking with Israel as
I understand it, i.e. a moratorium coupled with allowances to complete a number of housing units. There are
two ways:
1. To describe it as an agreement, explaining why the US has accepted an Israeli completion of a
handful of units whose construction already has begun. This raises some concerns. It would
represent U.S. legitimization of some (however small) Israeli activity in the West Bank and it
would trigger Arab and Palestinian complaints that we had compromised, sowing doubts about
our effectiveness.
2. The alternative would be for the administration to say:
a. We have come a very long way, as Israel has made unprecedented commitments to the U.S. in terms of a
settlements freeze. This is a very welcome development.
b. We did not achieve all that we had hoped as Israel intends to complete a number of
housing units. We have differences with the Israeli government on this matter which we
have expressed to them..
•c. That said, we are convinced that substantial progress has been made that warrants
an immediate resumption of peace talks as well as Arab steps toward Israel that will help
promote a two-state solution.
This latter option retains our credibility, does not compromise our oft-stated position and allows us to move
forward.
Of course, I am around if you want to discuss.
Good luck in India. They are very excited about your visit.
Sandy"
191;"Cc: Berger, Samuel R.
HRC: I wasn't satisfied by my answer to your question about how to gain leverage over the
Pakistanis to move them to more aggressively pursue AQ. I've thought about it some more and,
while I have no silver bullet, here are some further thoughts.
-- My impression is that the Pakistanis have been more cooperative lately in assisting us target some
AQ in Pakistan and that, where they hold back, it is less a function of affinity toward AQ and more
about with whom AQ is imbedded..
-- In particular, they seem to be more reluctant to target AQ where it is nestled with groups they want
to cultivate in the event we ""leave"" Afghanistan and they need influence there. They have seen that
before and will hedge their bets.
-- So the first point is that we have to address the reason why they are holding back. If we can
disabuse them of the perception that we are leaving Afghanistan, it will be easier to get the Pakistanis
to go after AQ in sanctuaries provided by groups which would be part of a future Afghanistan
dominated by the Taliban.
-- Second, I believe that coercive measures are more likely to be effective if they are targeted against
military leaders who give support to AQ and its allies. Assuming we have adequate intelligence, we
can go after bank accounts, travel and other reachable assets of individual Pakistani officers, raising
the stakes for those supporting the militants without creating an inordinate backlash . Blunter
measures of coercion, like conditioning our assistance, are more likely to be counterproductive. Given
the level of distrust for us among the Pakistani people, they would see this as another sharp swing of
the U.S. pendulum which would harden their attitudes and make greater cooperation very difficult for
the Pakistani people to accept.
-- There may be greater leverage in giving the Pakistanis incentives to be more aggressive. Of
course, the military's calculation is most important. I'm not sure what is on their shopping list these
days but we would need to balance what would move the needle on AQ against undercutting our
effort to get them to shift their strategic focus away from India. . At the same time, we can be as
forward leaning as possible in support of their counterinsurgency capabilities (equipment, training,
whatever material, intelligence and other assistance we can give them if they move into Wazeristan --
including relief for displaced persons). If they finally take that step, we can do all that is possible to
demonstrate that our arrows are aligned with theirs..
-- On the civilian side, their desire for greater control over how Kerry-Lugar money can be used can
be played to our strategic advantage. If we give them a greater sense that they are directing the use
of these funds -- without greatly undercutting their effectiveness -- it strengthens our position to press
them on AQ.
-- Finally, there is the defining relationship with India. Are there measures that the Indians could take
that would reduce Pakistani anxieties about the Indian front and thus better enable them to focus on
threats to the East, including both AQ and anti-Indian militant groups like LET? Are there confidence
building measures such as information sharing on troop movements that would both reduce
uncertainty and support a Pakistani public narrative for a shift in emphasis from India to the militancy?
To the extent India seeks to have Pakistan move more vigorously against the militants, they could
see such steps as advancing their interests. This is tricky territory but may be worth pursuing.
Sandy"
191;"Inside CGI.. More later.
This is written from my BlackBerry."
191;"Seems the best for a bad situation.
Moves the public discussion from settlement freeze to final status. Keeps some pressure on the parties. And seems like you will play a
more public role, which is good. (You have more credibility on both sides than anyone).
Going forward, if Bibi continues to be the obstacle, you will need to fmd the ground from which you can make his politics uneasy. I
think you can do that even with current concerns in Israel about US posture. But it will be easier as we rebuild trust so that our future
admonitions are accepted. (An HRC trip there to reframe perceptions?).
Finally, need to be mindful of Abu Mazen's politics. Taking a lot of criticism for meeting with Bibi without settlement freeze.
Sandy
This is written from my BlackBerry."
191;"Thought they were just right. 67 and Jerusalem for Pals. Jewish state and no preconditions for Bibi. Now, both parties can say they
got what they need, which hopefully creates some space to begin negotiations. Sandy
This is written from my BlackBerry."
191;"A very Merry Christmas and a rewarding new year.
It's been a hard but impressive year. Hope you are able to get a break to recharge for the next.
Best. Sandy
This is written from my BlackBerry."
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
192;"HRC: Below is an oped on the National Security Strategy I wrote for tomorrow's Outlook.
Unfortunately, they give it a horrible title, but I think the piece turned out alright.
Best, Sandy
By Samuel R. Berger
Samuel R. Berger, chair of the global strategy firm Albright Stonebridge Group, served as national security advisor to
President Clinton from 1997 to 2001.
President Obama's National Security Strategy, released by the White House on Thursday, tackles a delicate but
unavoidable question: How do we respond to new and old security challenges in an era of financial distress at home and
a reordering of political power abroad?
For some time now, it has been clear that the definition of U.S. national security strategy needs rethinking. The
September 11 attacks, global economic crisis, cyber-terror threats and even the environmental catastrophe in the Gulf
underscore that the challenges America faces in 2010 have changed even from just a decade ago. And while America's
military supremacy is certainly not at risk, new international arrangements - such as the shift from the G-7 club of
powerful nations to the G-20, which incorporates emerging nations from China to Brazil - are needed so that the costs
and benefits of a stable international order are shared. The United States cannot solve most global threats without
others, nor should we bear the burden alone.
Enter the National Security Strategy. In my experience, these congressionally mandated documents can easily become
laborious and impenetrable, or mere compendiums of bureaucratic pleading from various parts of the government.
(Make sure you do right by Japan! Don't step on the Pentagon!) The challenge, which President Clinton insisted upon to
me and his other advisers, is to provide a strategic framework that is clarifying to the rest of the world and informs
administration decision makers up and down the line. It's not a blueprint for action, but a means to convey the
president's principles and priorities.
In Obama's case, the new sober and comprehensive 52-page strategy incorporates the new realities and breaks with
past strategies in several key respects. But it also reflects an understanding that we face enduring challenges - nuclear
proliferation, terrorism and regional conflicts - for which the best response is a return to fundamentals.
One such fundamental is the strength of our economy. At a time when the after-effects of a financial crisis and the fiscal
burden of two long wars have raised fears of an overextended America, the administration makes a case for economic
and technological renewal as a crucial underpinning of U.S. security. The president made this case in his West Point
speech last weekend. ""At no time in human history,"" he said, ""has a nation of diminished economic vitality maintained
its military and political primacy.""
Another fundamental challenge is arms control and nuclear proliferation. By seeking strategic arms cuts with Russia, the
president has returned to a long bipartisan tradition that languished during the prior administration. And by convening a
global summit on securing nuclear material this spring, Obama has given new urgency and global purchase to the effort
started in 1991 when Sens. Sam Nunn and Richard Lugar first initiated a program to lock down nuclear materials.
On terrorism, the strategy builds on the past, but breaks with it as well. Presidents Clinton, Bush and Obama each have
deployed all of America's tools: military power, homeland defense, law enforcement, sanctions, intelligence and
vigorous efforts to cut off terrorist financing. But the critical difference in the Obama strategy is that it rejects the Global
War on Terror lens through which the prior administration viewed the challenge. ""This is not a global war against a tactic
- terrorism - or a religion - Islam,"" the new strategy says. ""We are at war with a specific network, al-Qaeda and its
terrorist affiliates.""
This sharper focus avoids alienating many in the Muslim world, ensures the support of key allies who never accepted the
broader construct and avoids the overreactions that led us to forsake the fight against al-Qaeda fight in Afghanistan and
turn our efforts to the unrelated threat from Saddam Hussein's Iraq.
In perhaps the most dramatic departure from the strategy of its predecessor, the Obama administration has restored a
less provocative policy on the use of military force. In the 2002 national security strategy, President Bush articulated the
rationale for preemptive war just weeks before seeking a U.N. resolution to invade Iraq. The new strategy restores the
principles that have guided administrations for decades: the use of force should be a last resort, should weigh all the
costs and benefits, and should have as much international support as possible. The administration reserves the right to
act unilaterally - for example against al-Qaeda and its allies - but resurrects the principle President Clinton often
described as ""together where possible, alone where necessary.""
President Obama's critics have focused on his diplomatic engagement with hostile states like Iran and North Korea. The
President sets forth his rationale: ""to create opportunities to resolve differences, strengthen the international
community's support for our actions, learn about the intentions and nature of closed regimes, and plainly demonstrate
to the public within those nations that their governments are to blame for their isolation.""
In the case of Iran, Washington's outstretched hand has not resulted in Iran's compliance. But attempts to engage have
helped ensure that the world's attention is focused on Iran's intransigence rather than Washington's refusal to
negotiate.
Without a doubt, there are gaps between principle and practice. Despite the Obama administration's stated goal of
doubling exports in the next five years, it has not put its muscle behind trade agreements with South Korea, Panama and
Colombia. And the clarity of its call to respect human rights has at times been muted in the face of tough realities.
Sixteen months into this administration there has been much progress, but many of the true tests of this strategy lie
ahead.
In the strategy's conclusions, the Obama administration evokes an even earlier era, calling for both political parties to
restore the cooperation and common purpose so crucial to our success during the dark days of the Cold War. Despite
the intense debates at the time over nuclear arms control, Central America and détente, nearly all American supported
the containment of communism.
In that same spirit, the administration's framework deserves broad bipartisan support. We can and should argue out our
differences over detention of prisoners, methods to disarm dangerous states, how hard to push for democratic rights, or
the costs of climate change legislation. But at the same time, we can rally around the overriding U.S. foreign policy goals
spelled out in the strategy: renewing our economy at home to ensure leadership abroad; defeating al-Qaeda; succeeding
in Afghanistan; preventing nuclear proliferation; curbing climate change; and promoting an international order of
enlightened self-interest, economic prosperity and the fundamental values upon which America is based."
192;"Samuel Berger
Thursday, August 26, 2010 10:08 PM
RE: Can we schedule call over the weekend?
I am around Fri-Sun. •Leave on Monday.
Best numbers: w)202-637-5698"
192;yes
192;"Cc:
Samuel Berger
Saturday, August 28, 2010 5:30 PM
H
Samuel Berger
Principles_Design_Working Draft.pdf; Principles_Design_Working Draft.pdf
HRC: I am attaching a matrix of prior language that has been used in connection with the major Israeli-Palestinian
issues.
It was prepared in the context of language the US might use if it were to articulate principles, not principles to which the
parties might agree, but it provides most of the language that has been used in the past, with citations.
The USIP Middle East group Steve and I chair decided that rather than issue a static report, we would
prepare/commission a series of timely and specific papers that we would provide privately to the Administration. (I have
sent some of those to your office). They include papers on security, Palestinian institution building, public attitudes in
Israel and the territories, etc.
I will deliver a set of those papers to your office on Monday
If it would be useful, I would be happy to convene a small, private discussion with some of the sharpest people in the
group, or give you some names.
A few observations following up our call this am.:
(1) This (a Framework Agreement) is very difficult but I don't think impossible. If Bibi can say he has secured
unprecedented commitments on security and established the principle of a Jewish state, he could decide to
play the historic leader. If he is uncompromising, he will have to deal with the consequences for US-Israeli
relations. His opt out, of course, is to blame the Pais, but we will be ""in the room"".
(2) I think this should be a negotiation that goes from principle to paper rather than the other way around, i.e. not
an early exchange of documents that dig each side into its positions. The two leaders need to feel each
other out first at the level of first principles, to be distilled after a period by the U.S.
(3) Not sure we need to be in every meeting.. Ultimately, they need to establish some trust. But we (you or
Mitchell) need to be present enough to make sure that there is no misunderstanding of what has been
agreed, and to move things along. .
(4) On the critical issue of security, I don't think the Israelis any more trust NATO to stand firm. They will expect
an IDF presence in the Jordan Valley for some time. Palestinians recognize that there will be a transitional
phase. Question is how long.
(5) As you know, Abbas' position is crumbling. Based on my conversation with him when he was here recently, I
think he is genuinely committed to an agreement. He hopes that, if this fails, Bibi will seem to be
unreasonable. And in that event, I expect he will resign. His minimal requirement is the equivalent of 1967.
This is all tricky business, but I don't think we have a responsible choice not to make this effort. It is the highest form of
statesmanship for you to try.
I am leaving on Monday for some foreign travel but can be reached through my office -- Laura
Huber
Sandy"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
119;"Madam Secretary,
It was terrific to see you the other day for the photo shoot with the ambassador designees. Elaine and I are
excited -- and grateful to you -- for the opportunity.
As we discussed, I am in the building, working out of the transition office as the confirmation process inches
forward. Elaine and I are busy gearing up but, as we discussed, I am happy to pitch in on specific projects or
anything else if the need arises. In the meantime, best wishes to you and your family.
Best,
Lee"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
122;"Lissa Muscatine
Tuesday, April 14, 2009 10:58 PM
Speech Draft
I'm faxing you a draft of the speech. It is way too long and something of a hybrid, having started out as a big
policy speech in advance of the summit. Now it is a town hall one day before the POTUS outlines his agenda at
the intervention. My suggestion is that you review this long draft, which covers a lot of ground (though not
everything). In the meantime, I'll work on an abbreviated version that focuses on your main themes -- the
urgency of our working together with other countries to narrow the income gap and reduce poverty by creating
a safety net of education, food security, and public safety that unleashes the full potential of the people and
nations of our Hemisphere."
122;"I can fax you the boiled down version now or Huma can print it for you in the morning.
This is the 5th summit. Some of the others evidently were not ""official."""
122;"You will be getting a fax shortly of a very rough draft of the big speech. There are still many holes, and placeholders, in it.
Hopefully it's enough to spur some of your own thinking."
122;"Muscatine Lissa
Tuesday, July 14, 2009 5:33 AM
CFR draft
The draft still needs a lot of work."
122;"Will do.
On Jul 14, 2009, at 5:35 AM, H wrote:
> Thanks so much. Pls send it to me at same time so I can review as
> well.
>"
122;"Muscatine Lissa
Tuesday, July 14, 2009 7:43 AM
H
Huma Abedin; Lissa Muscatine
CFR latest draft
CFR for HRC 7.14.09 730 am.dat; ATT00001.txt
This is getting there."
122;"Lissa Muscatine
Tuesday, July 14, 2009 9:57 AM
Re: CFR latest draft
On Tue, Jul 14, 2009 at 9:46 AM, H <HDR22@clintonemai1.com> wrote:
It is getting better. I've gone thru it once and will be ready to discuss later. Thank you s000 much."
122;I emailed it to you a few minutes ago. Do you want me to fax it as well?
122;Faxing to you now.
122;"You should have received two faxes stacked together accidentally. The one you want says ""9 pm"" on the top left. I am
sending the remaining pages (about 5-6) now. The one that says 8:15 pm is the wrong version so ignore it.
• 212"
122;"Good. Just incorporating some line edits from Cheryl and want to make sure I got all of yours in. Have been getting
feedback from Podesta et. al. Will have new draft to you shortly."
122;You will have a tight draft in 30 minutes — at 8:15-ish..
122;202
122;Sorry about the gaps and typos. Will clean it up. And of course we can chat whenever you're ready.
122;Sure. Will send as soon as I can.
122;Will do
122;"I hope I got all the gaps/typos. Will send to WJC now.
208"
122;Do you want me just to drive it over to you? I could be there in 10 minutes.
122;This is getting there.
122;Always glad to pitch in. It came out great and your delivery was fantastic! Onward and upward!
122;"You probably already know this, but I just heard from a friend who is wired at Meet the Press that David Gregory will ask
you about David Maziar, the Newsweek journalist arrested in Iran."
122;You ought to bring it to your speech in N Ireland
122;"We're still pulling material for you, but in them meantime i wanted to let you know the following (which I'll
send as full documents later):
1)State Department Human Rights Report 2003 discusses the problem of rape in custody in Sri Lanka
2) Amnesty International issued a full report on Rape in Sri Lanka in 2002 (with specific cases cited and a
general discussion of the problem being on the increase)
3) UNHCR website has a a page devoted to rape in Sri Lanka and references the Amnesty International Report
4)Asia Human Rights Commission issued a report titled: Sri Lanka: Systematic Detention, Torture, Rape and
Murder as Weapon of War (2000)
I checked the BCL that came from Melanne's office with this information. It was cleared by JO, PRM, P, D/L,
D/S, AF, and assorted others.
The problem is that it was not sent to SCA or East Asia and should have been. But the rest of the building
signed off on it.
Also, it is clear that the reference in the Security Council statement referred to rapes in the past.The first
reference is to rape in the DRC and Sudan. Two sentences later we say:
""We've seen rape used as a tactic of war before in Bosnia, Burma, Sri Lanka, and elsewhere. ""
Can you download these documents if I email them to you? Otherwise I can try to paste them into emails."
122;"Operative language / Sri Lanka:
The Government generally respected the human rights of its citizens; however,
there were serious problems in some areas. There were no reports of security
forces committing politically motivated killings and no reports of
disappearances; however, the military and police reportedly tortured, killed
and raped detainees."
122;"Am about to fax %roll the latest draft. There is still some litigating going on over Iran language, but hopefully we can
resolve it by later tonight. In any case, it's pretty far along. I'll try to do one more polish through it. Just be advised that I
n lay need to give you a clean draft overnight or early in the morning. Thx.
66"
122;"Faxing to you there. Keep in mind that it is rough and has placeholders and some notional sections in brackets. Thx.
Sent from my iPhone
On Sep 20, 2009, at 10:18 PM, H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
> I'm in NY. Thx."
122;"I agree with Dan about the ornament problem. The draft needs refinement not re-working. And a call is a great idea. I
am just getting off a plane but could be available any time after 4 pm or so if that works for you."
122;"I've just asked the Specials to fax the draft to you in Chappaqua. You should be getting it shortly. Hopefully this is a start.
Feedback welcome, of course."
122;"Sure. It should have been sent three hours ago. Will figure out what happened.
On Jan 31, 2010, at 5:13 PM, H wrote:
> I was out but upon return, did not find a faxed speech. Can you track
> down?"
122;"If Huma is with you, she has an electronic copy and apparently was going to print it for you rather than use a faxed
version. FYI: It is not in speech font yet -- I just wanted you to see where this is going, but we can send one with bigger
spacing and bigger type too in case you want to write your own thoughts on it.
On Jan 31, 2010, at 5:13 PM, H wrote:
> I was out but upon return, did not find a faxed speech. Can you track
> down?
>
>"
122;"Thx
Sent from my iPhone
On Jan 31, 2010, at 5:45 PM, H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
> I now have it. Thx
>"
122;Just faxed it to you. Let me know if you didn't get it. Thanks.
122;Revised human rights draft is being faxed to you in Chappaqua. You should have it in the next few minutes.
122;Thanks. I think we're getting her points all covered.
122;"Here is a new top. We will add the point about how much we actually spend on foreign aid (vs what people think we
spend) a little later in the speech. Wanted to get this to you to see if it is going in the right direction. Am also faxing to
you.
Development / New Top"
122;Sorry. I was driving in so didn't see your message when you sent it. You should have the new draft from Megan by now.
122;Great idea. I wonder if we should also try to get it published in Foreign Affairs or something equivalent.
122;"I will work with her on specifics and get more info to you. She is an expert on Pakistan more than Haiti but obviously
knows about the threat of child exploitation in these situations. Will see what we can find out."
122;GTIP is working on it. Also, meant to say that Jillian works on Iran, not Pakistan.
122;Assume you remember her
122;"Sheepishly inquired as to whether you might be willing to speak at Madeira's commencement on June 4th in the
morning. It's her last time officiating as head of the school. It's a couple of days before the Lat Am trip. Thoughts?"
122;I'll find out about the date and whether they could move it.
122;"Great! We will start working on how to connect these issues thematically, beginning with CARE speech. Maybe can
weave water in there as well to underscore our point."
122;Do you want notes/background material or a script for your remarks at the memorial? Also Madeira
122;"I refined my earlier draft and worked in
(LM3) is in your book for tonight.
see what you think. The new draft"
122;"Jerry, as you may recall, was Guiliani's homeland security guy in NYC and became B6
one of the world's experts. He also worked for Clinton Admn and helped with disaster relief (including earthquakes)
around the world. He called me today with some suggestions (some of which may be moot), so I asked him to put them
into a memo. Here it is, for what it's worth:
I think the fundamental issue is that no one seems to be in charge and no
one person has been tasked with trying to pull all of the pieces together
into a short term and long term plan. Obviously in the short term, search
and rescue and food and water are the main priorities. There seems to be
little communication between the various areas where people have congregated
and a central command post where agencies can call or radio for additional
supplies including food, water and medical.
I don't recommend DoD be put in charge of this. They rarely have the kind of
touch that brings together all the necessary agencies under one roof. I
would set up a central command that has representatives from all federal
agencies in one place. There is no reason things should be this
disorganized. I would break the island into grids and assign one person to
be the coordinator for each of the grids. That person will be responsible
for all activities within their grid and will report activities to the
island on-scene coordinator. We should get a radio company like Motorola to
set up temporary towers and give the State Department several hundred radios
so everyone involved in the response is able to communicate with the command
post and with each other.
I think one of the most important roles for DoD is to provide security for
the rescue teams and medical teams. They also should be responsible for the
operation of the airport, for off loading planes and for scheduling all
incoming flights so there is no lost time waiting for planes to land. I also
think DoD should be responsible for airlifting supplies that are requested
by each one of the grid coordinators. Additionally, the helicopters should
be used to move critical patients to the hospital ship on the way and to the
aircraft carrier currently on station. At least once a day, the coordinator
assigned by the President and the Secretary of State should be responsible
for getting situation reports from all agencies on site, particularly
regarding food and water, security, medical and search and rescue.
The lack of command and control is allowing the situation to become more
chaotic rather than more coordinated. I believe that if the Secretary were
to talk to the other nations involved through the UN, they would be
supportive of better coordination.
Bottom line is that there is no order to the operation and you need strong
people in there who can speak on behalf of the President and the Secretary
and get things under control quickly.
I hope this is helpful. If you or the Secretary have any questions please
feel free to call me on my cell We leave for Tokyo at 7:15 am
tomorrow and transfer to a United flight due back in DC at 2:30 pm tomorrow.
Please give the Secretary my best regards. I hope to see you soon.
B6"
122;"This is an AFP report from today.
Also, GTIP is working on a memo for you and Cheryl about child trafficking dangers in Haiti.
Trafficking fears as Haiti children go missing
Posted 5 hours 47 minutes ago
Updated 5 hours 46 minutes ago
Slideshow: Photo 1 of 2
The UN has warned countries not to step up adoptions from Haiti in the wake of the disaster. (AFP: Matthew
Marek
United Nations officials say children have gone missing from hospitals in Haiti since the devastating January 12
earthquake, raising fears of trafficking for adoption abroad.
""We have documented around 15 cases of children disappearing from hospitals and not with their own family at
the time,"" said UNICEF adviser Jean Luc Legrand.
""UNICEF has been working in Haiti for many years and we knew the problem with the trade of children in
Haiti that existed already beforehand.
""Unfortunately, many of these trade networks have links with the international adoption market.""
The agency said it had warned countries during the past week not to step up adoptions from Haiti in the
immediate wake of the quake.
However several are fast-tracking adoption procedures already under way, including Belgium, Canada, France,
Germany, the Netherlands, Spain and the United States.
Mr Legrand said the situation was similar to the aftermath of the tsunami in Asia five years ago.
Trafficking networks were springing into action immediately after the disaster and taking advantage of the
weakness of local authorities and relief coordination ""to kidnap children and get them out of the country"".
Rupert Colville, a spokesman for the office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, said child
enslavement and trafficking in Haiti was ""an existing problem and could easily emerge as a serious issue over
the coming weeks and months"".
The UN mission in Haiti has stepped up surveillance of roads, UNICEF officials said.
Mr Legrand said there was separate but only anecdotal evidence of people taking children by road to the
neighbouring Dominican Republic and loading children on to planes.
""We have seen over the past years many children being taken out of the country without any legal procedure,""
he said.
""This is going on. This is happening now. We are starting to have the first evidence of that, this is
unquestionable.""
He was unable to give details on the 15 missing children or their condition or clearly connect the anecdotal
observations in Haiti's chaos with trafficking.
The cases were documented by social workers and by partner non-governmental organisations working for
UNICEF in hospitals.
- AFP"
122;"If you have the time or inclination, it would be really nice if you could send an email to Tom icah, or phone him. He went
for almost 100 hours without sleep to get the speech done, under unusually trying circumstances. He deserves some
recognition for grace under pressure and a job well done."
122;Great. Thanks. I know he will appreciate it.
122;The little things go a long way. Thanks for being in touch with him.
122;"I just wanted to make sure you know that the CARE speech is now going to focus on nutrition/health/early childhood,
rather than being a major health speech. I still feel that you need to do a health speech as a bookend to food and water
— perhaps before UNGA. You could focus on health in the context of the larger Millennium Dev Goals. You have not
given a speech yet about maternal and child health. We have a great story to tell with our investment in GHI, and there
will be an opportunity to tell it with the ramp-up to UNGA (with the Summit focusing on MDGs). There is a tremendous
amount of activity going on elsewhere in the world. And this is a legacy issue for you. (I have already relayed this idea to
CDM and Jake)."
122;"The ""doctrine of no surprises"" has become my personal mantra. Glad you like it. And Happy Mother's Day to you too!"
122;"B6
On another note, I hope we might have time to chat briefly before I leave State — maybe when you're in the office in
mid-August. Two issues I want to discuss: 1) sports diplomacy 2) a series of speeches I'd love you to give on young
people (the public diplomacy speech could be one piece).
I'd also be happy to share some observations about this place if that might be useful to you.
Safe travels.
Lissa Muscatine
Senior Advisor and Director of Speechwriting
Department of State
202-647-9841"
122;"No because we have not gotten comments back yet, unless you want to wait to see another version tomorrow.
Sent from my iPhone. Apologies for any typos.
On Aug 23, 2010, at 9:30 AM, H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
> Should I wait for your next draft then?
>"
122;"Great. Thx.
Sent from my iPhone. Apologies for any typos.
On Aug 23, 2010, at 10:27 AM, H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
> I will call you later to discuss.
>"
122;
122;"Lissa Muscatine <
Tuesday, August 17, 2010 11:44 PM
Most importantly....
I enjoyed our talk too, but forgot to mention the most important thing of all -- how much I appreciate your bringing me
to State and giving me this opportunity. I have learned so much, meant so many smart and capable people, and hope I
have contributed in some small way to what you are working so hard to accomplish.
I'll write a formal letter for ""the file"" when I leave conveying all of these thoughts„ but I wanted to say something in
person too.
Unfortunately, I got carried away on sports diplomacy and everything else and ....another senior moment!
I'll let you know when I have had a chance to talk to Judith and Ann about the ideas I'm putting together on sports. I do
think there is potential to do much more than is being done now -- and more creatively."
122;Huma -- Could you print this document. It has the two different openings for the FA piece. Thx. Lissa
122;Yes. We are trying to re-do the opening per Jake right now. Also adding more granularity.
122;"Lissa Muscatine <
Friday, August 20, 2010 11:09 AM
Re: Most importantly....
Thanks for your nice words. They mean a lot. I will always, always play for your team, officially or not!
Many more thoughts on sports diplomacy that I'm excited about. And yes, once a jock, now an aging jock!
On QDDR article, you'll see that a lot is missing (most notably a section on the Middle East, as well as China, Western
Hemisphere (we should probably mention ECPA), a good energy example per David Goldwyn, et. al). it may also be too
Pakistan heavy, though it is a great example of everything we are trying to do. My main goal was to try to ground the
many elements at play in a more coherent narrative with a theme and thread that carried through. Didn't have enough
time on the bottom third. Hopefully this version gives us something to work with, though.
And I really hope you get some semblance of time off this week. If only the world would, for once, cooperate.
On Aug 19, 2010, at 3:51 PM, H wrote:
> It has, as always, been a joy to have you on the team. We've worked
> together for so long, that I always feel better when I know you're
> there--putting words in my mouth and watching my back.
> I enjoyed our talk and was delighted to hear about all you're planning
> to do--especially on the sports front. Just goes to show, once a jock
> always a jock!
> Thx too for the rescue effort you're doing on the ODOR article.
>"
122;"We are working to incorporate some of the missing links but I haven't gotten any comments from anyone. I am hoping
Jake is reading it this afternoon and AMS says she will have comments by this evening. We can get another draft to you
tomorrow if that would be best and save you some time. But do let me know if there is anything major that you think is
off, or should be excised or any other red flags. I won't be able to work on it until later tonight (am driving Max to PA for
a soccer tournament but can work on it when I get there).
On Aug 20, 2010, at 3:16 PM, H wrote:
> I think the article is headed in the right direction but I agree w you
> that the points you mention should be referenced. Are you getting
> comments from others? Should I wait for the next draft to comment?
>"
122;I am pretty flexible on time of call.
122;Ok
122;"Tomorrow will give you a cleaner version, but you could get the current draft this morning if today is better for you
work-wise."
122;"I gave AMS a revised draft yesterday morning and I just got it back with her retooled diplomatic section. She has asked
for some more fact-checking to be done today. Hopefully she didn't re-write too much. I will know more when I work on
it more closely this afternoon."
122;"I had a good discussion with Jake and AMS last night and we all agree that the most recent draft helped us crystallize
what the main point actually is (and isn't). So I am re-working the intro to focus more directly on the intersection of
diplomacy and development as the basis for the QDDR. I think it's working well. AMS is emphatic about re- doing the
diplomacy section along these lines, so I hope to get her stuff this afternoon (I will probably need to polish it up). And I
am re-tooling the other buckets to fit into this better and tighter frame. Jake suggests we get it to you tomorrow if that's
okay. And thanks for the good wishes to Max!
On Aug 21, 2010, at 11:32 AM, H wrote:
> Whenever you think it's ready, send it to Huma for printing for me.
> Thx so much and good luck to Max!
>"
122;"Great. Thanks. Will give you a heads up when am sending to Huma.
On Aug 21, 2010, at 12:17 PM, H wrote:
> That's ok."
122;"We are expecting comments back from the larger group this afternoon and will begin to incorporate them this evening.
The draft needs polishing, as you can see. Will you be sending your own comments or waiting for the next draft? Thx."
122;"Lissa Muscatine <
Monday, August 23, 2010 9:25 AM
Re: Foreign Affairs
Any time between about 1 and 4 would be best if that works for you.
The draft as it stands now is a conglomeration of points from AMS, Jake, and me, but I wasn't able to write through the
whole thing before you got it.
On Aug 23, 2010, at 9:22 AM, H wrote:
> I would like to call you later today. What times work for you after
> noon?
>"
122;"Here is the latest (as of Saturday at 12:30 am). This reflects the changes we discussed in our call on Wednesday, as well
as feedback from assorted vetters. I've also trimmed and tweezed it down to about
6,100 words. We should probably attempt to trim some more if we can.
It's a very long piece. -- Lissa"
122;"That would be great. Fax is
Sent from my iPhone. Apologies for any typos.
On Aug 28, 2010, at 8:32 AM, H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
> Thx. I'll work on it and may I fax back to you my changes?
>"
122;Thx. Will be home in an hour and will check.
122;"Yes, got them. Jake wanted to put them in himself so he could make his own fixes at te same time. He will send us all a
clean version."
122;"Here is the latest draft, which incorporates your changes and suggestions, and has been through each of us (me, Jake,
and AMS) at least once. There may still be a few facts to be tweaked and we are looking for one more example from
WHA for the Mexico paragraph. I will also re-read it carefully later tonight and tomorrow morning to catch any typos,
weird grammar, or things that don't flow. I'm too close to it now and want to read it again when I'm fresh. But hopefully
this is close to final.
Lissa"
122;"You may have gotten this sad news from Lauren or Tamera already, but if not, see the message below.
Begin forwarded message:"
122;"I think it is a strong case and very clear now. I just want to read it again in the morning to make sure everything tracks
and flows and double check a few facts. Also I realized this afternoon that we weren't overt about the QDDR being the
first of many, but I think I took care of that in this draft. All in all, I feel good about it.
Sent from my iPhone. Apologies for any typos.
On Aug 29, 2010, at 4:47 PM, H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> wrote:
> Thx for all you work on this. Do you fell ok about it now?
>"
122;"I have suggested to Dan the following edit to the
grafs on page 2 (not sure why the fonts are showing
up different here, but you'll get the idea....I can
improve the language but wanted to give you a sense
of what I think is still missing in his latest draft).
B5"
122;"Lissa Muscatine <
Wednesday, September 8, 2010 8:13 AM
H
Re: suggested edit to CFR
He had included a phrase or two as of a few hours ago, but maybe he has since added the whole riff.
On Sep 8, 2010, at 7:47 AM, H wrote:
> I just got the final draft and it looks like your suggestions were
> included.
>
>"
122;"I'm meeting with Judith on Monday before I leave (that's my last day/morning) to talk about sports diplomacy. Will
keep you posted.
Lissa Muscatine
Senior Advisor and Director of Speechwriting
Department of State
(w) 202-647-9841
(bb)"
122;"Lissa Muscatine <Imuscatine■
Monday, October 25, 2010 12:18 AM
checking in
Just wanted to see if everything is going okay from your vantage point with the speech team. I hear from each of them
now and then but want to make sure things are working out the way you want them to."
122;"Glad to hear that you're happy with the transition.
III keep you posted on what I'm hearing. In the
meantime, good luck on the trip and one of these years we will get you to our Halloween party! xoxo
On Oct 29, 2010, at 10:48 PM, H wrote:
He's w me in Vietnam right
> now. So, altho I miss you, I think we're ok. Let me know what you
> hear. Love to all--H
> -----"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
205;"I am on travel with the Secretary and have very irregular email access. If you need to reach me urgently, please call the
State Department Operations Center. Otherwise, Ill get back to you the week of March 22.
Thanks,
Tomicah"
205;Yes -- I'm finalizing the visuals now and should have it for you in the next half hour.
205;"The plan is to have a large screen off to your side so that it won't get in the way of a tight shot. We've worked with
National Geographic on the photos -- some of which are quite stunning -- and they'll pace the presentation slowly with
long transitions so it's not distracting. I've folded the images into the text I'm sending you, but you'll have a
teleprompter on stage tomorrow."
205;I've sent the file to Ops. They'll fax over a black and white version momentarily, and send a color copy via courier.
205;"Thanks very much. On your questions:
Also, pls be sure the text is carefully proofread since there are a number of typos and missing words.
Absolutely -- sorry about that.
Thanks,
Tomicah"
205;"You're very kind. The delivery was flawless and your idea to focus on the girl rescued from the rubble in Haiti wove it all
together. It was an honor to help out -- and I think we did some real good. Onward, onward...
Best,
Tomicah
Tomicah Tillemann, Ph.D.
Speechwriter
Policy Planning Staff
Department of State
S/P Main: 202.647.2372 I Direct: I Blackberry: urgent calls only)
Fax: 202.647.0844 I Room 7311 (S/P) I 2201 C Street NW I Washington, DC 20520"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
56;Thanks so much. Safe travels in India and Thailand. I'll be getting the China S+ED ready!
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
50;Love to. I look forward to it!
50;"Thanks!
306"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
21;"http://religion.b1ogs.cnn.com/20 1 2/09/13/my-take-a-deadlv-link-between-islamic-and-anti-islam c-extremists/
Editor's Note: Stephen Prothero, a Boston University religion scholar and author of ""The American Bible:
How Our Words Unite, Divide, and Define a Nation,"" is a regular CNN Belief Blog contributor.
By Stephen Prothero, Special to CNN
What should we make of the attacks on the U.S. consulates in Egypt, Libya and Yemen, and the deaths of
four Americans, including U.S. ambassador to Libya Chris Stevens?
It depends on who you mean by ""we.""
From the perspective of those who stormed the embassies, taking down the American flag in Egypt and
replacing it with a black flag reading, ""There is no God but Allah and Mohammed is his messenger,"" theirs was
an act of justice on behalf of the One True Faith.
The Americans had it coming, according to this view, because Americans are on the wrong side in the clash of
civilizations between the Judeo-Christian West and the Muslim world. And the creation of an anti-Islamic video
(ironically entitled ""Innocence of Muslims"") by a producer thought to be an American provided the catalyst
(or excuse) for the protests.
Why Muslims are sensitive about portraying the Prophet Mohammed
Most Americans operate by a different ""we."" From our perspective, the assault was an unjust and cowardly
attack on (among other things) the rule of law, the institution of diplomacy and the right of free speech.
Libyan Deputy Prime Minister Mustafa Abushagur gave voice to this perspective when he said on Twitter, ""I
condemn these barbaric attacks in the strongest possible terms. This is an attack on America, Libya and free
people everywhere.""
""Some have sought to justify this vicious behavior as a response to inflammatory material posted on the
Internet,"" Secretary of State Hillary Clinton added. ""The United States deplores any intentional effort to
denigrate the religious beliefs of others. Our commitment to religious tolerance goes back to the very beginning
of our nation.""
In a commencement speech at Kenyon College in 2005, later published as""This Is Water,"" novelist David
Foster Wallace urged student to scrutinize the ""natural, basic self-centeredness"" that puts ""me"" at the center of
the world.
This unconscious ""default setting"" fosters the sort of ""blind certainty"" that manifests as arrogant atheism and
fundamentalism alike, Wallace said. And the point of education is to shake us out of that ""default setting"" — to
begin to see things from the perspectives of others.
Follow the CNN Belief Blog on Twitter
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739590
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045293
B6
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739590
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
Wallace focused in his speech on the individual ""I."" But his critique can be applied as well to another ""default
setting"" (this one more cultural than natural): our tendency to understand the world from the perspective of
Give:5
According to those who stormed the embassies, ""Innocence of Muslims"" was not made by an individual
(whoever the shadowy ""Sam Bacile"" may — or may not — be). It was made by anAmerican.
Moreover, according to this groupthink, Americans as a group are responsible for the sins of individual
Americans, so it makes perfect sense to strike out at embassy personnel who issued a statement before the
protests turned deadly, condemning ""the continuing efforts by misguided individuals to hurt the religious
feelings of Muslims, as we condemn efforts to offend believers of all religions.""
CNN's Belief Blog: The faith angles behind the biggest stories
Meanwhile, the shadowy figures who produced and distributed ""Innocence of Muslims"" are imprisoned in some
groupthink of their own, which gathers all the world's Muslims under the category of an evil Islamic empire.
Their film doesn't just depict Mohammed as a con man, philanderer, and pedophile. It portrays his followers as
dupes.
Unfortunately, the events of recent days have done nothing to jar the alleged producer out of this default setting.
When questioned about his film in the aftermath of the Libyan and Egyptian attacks, a man identifying himself
as ""Sam Bacile"" reportedly told the Wall Street Journal that ""Islam is a cancer.""
You don't need a Kenyon college degree to see how this vicious cycle of provocation and violence is fueled,
and you don't need to be a moral relativist to see that it takes two sides to keep it running.
I am an American who is justly proud of the First Amendment and its protections of freedom of speech and
religion. And I believe that killing your opponents in the name of God or nation is a far greater offense than
offending them with an ignorant movie.
Nonetheless, the root problem on display here is in my view what Wallace denounced as ""blind certainty.""
Our world is not divided first and foremost along religious or national lines, into Muslims and Christians and
Hindus or Israelis and Americans and Egyptians.
Neither is it divided into secularists and people of faith — the New Atheists and partisans of old-time religion.
The real ""red line"" in the modem world divides the certain from the uncertain. And in the tragic events of recent
days, those who produced and distributed this hateful movie stand on the same side of this line as the killers of
innocents in Libya and Egypt.
Both groups are possessed by the unholy spirit of ""blind certainty,"" unacquainted with both the complexity and
contradictions of life on Earth and the ""cloud of unknowing"" that hovers over every major religion.
The great religious thinkers in Judaism, Christianity and Islam always knew enough to know that they did not
know everything.
They knew the difference between the eternal decrees of the God of Abraham and the all-too-flawed thoughts of
ordinary people. They knew, in short, that they are not God, who alone is charged with creating and destroying
the world and discriminating along the way between the real and the illusory.
The killers in Libya have forgotten that. So have the not-so-innocent producers and distributors of Innocence
of Islam.""
The opinions expressed in this commentary are solely those of Stephen Prothero.
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739590
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045294
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739590
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER.
CNN's Belief Blog: The faith angles behind the biggest stories
Follow the CNN Belief flog on Twitter
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739590
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045295"
21;"LexmarkAIOScan9jpg; LexmarkAIOScan11jpg; LexmarkAIOScan12jpg;
LexmarkAIOScan13jpg; LexmarkAIOScan9jpg
I agreed to this feature because the mag covers most of Travis' district... Hoping to add some narrative and values to
things down there... A good bit of copy on the Clinton family... It doesn't seem to be online (not yet anyway). took
shots of hardcopy (attachments) and sent to us:
Sent from my Verizon Wireless BlackBerry"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
144;"Cc: Sullivan, Jacob J
Madam Secretary,
Attached and below please find a brief backgrounder on the United States Institute of Peace. Please let me know if you
would like any further information.
Thanks,
Mike
United States Institute of Peace: Background
Proposals for the creation of a government ""peace"" agency stretch as far back as a proposal in 1792 to create a ""Peace
Office"" on par with the War Department. Between 1935 and 1976 over 140 bills were introduced in Congress to
establish peace-related agencies, departments, bureaus, and committees of Congress. In 1979 Congress established the
Commission on Proposals for the National Academy of Peace and Conflict Resolution. In 1981, the Commission — known
as the Matsunaga Commission for its head, Senator Spark Matsunaga — recommended the creation of a national peace
academy. In 1984, President Reagan signed the United States Institute of Peace Act and the first meeting of USIP's Board
of Directors took place in 1986.
The USIP Act established ""an independent, nonprofit, national institute to serve the people and the Government
through the widest possible range of education and trainings, basic and applied research opportunities, and peace
information services on the means to promote international peace and the resolution of conflicts among the nations and
peoples of the world without recourse to violence.""
USIP is an independent agency, funded by Congress, which serves as an intersection between those involved in policy
research, fieldwork, and practitioners. More than 70 USIP policy experts conduct research on a wide variety of country-
specific and cross-cutting functional issues. Some examples of USIP activities include:
® Working in countries such as Iraq, Sudan, Nigeria, Uganda, Pakistan, and Afghanistan to mediate and facilitate
dialogue among parties in conflict, promote the rule of law, strengthen civil society and education systems, and
educating the public through events, films, and other outreach.
O USIP has given out $58 million in grants for over 1,700 peacebuilding projects in 76 countries.
® USIP hosts standing working groups of experts and practitioners on a variety of issues, including Sudan, Syria,
Korea, Iran, Iraq, and Haiti.
® USIP has facilitated a number of task forces, including the Iraq Study Group and the recent Congressional
Commission on the Strategic Posture of the United States, chaired by William Perry.
Michael H. Fuchs
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-1709"
144;"Madam Secretary,
Thank you so much. It is very exciting to finally see the book in print (when I first got a copy I was almost afraid to look
inside it!). I hope you enjoy it. And yes, I have been working with Lissa and others on the democracy/human rights
speech.
On the question about UK soldiers - the UK lost more soldiers in the Falklands than they have in Afghanistan:
255 in the Falklands
235 in Afghanistan (including British forces personnel and MOD civilians)
Please let me know if you would like any other information on that.
Again, thank you so much, and Happy Thanksgiving!
Sincerely,
Mike"
144;Will do. Thanks
144;"Madam Secretary,
Jake mentioned that you would like to see a copy of John Podesta's recent interview with the Financial Times. A
transcript of the interview has not been posted yet, but I have included here the Financial Times article about the
interview. Please just let me know if you would like any further information on this.
Best,
Mike
Former aide urges Obama to regain 'political narrative'
By Edward Luce in Washington
Published: February 15 2010
Barack Obama, US president, has lost control of the political narrative and needs to make more use of his cabinet in
order to regain it, says John Podesta, the man who headed the president's transition team.
""My friends in the White House would agree with this, that they lost the narrative,"" Mr Podesta said in an interview for
View from DC, the Financial Times' video series from Washington. ""Clearly that needs not one speech once in a while: it
needs, I think, to be constantly reinforced. And not just by the president, but by his entire team ... He's got a terrific
cabinet. Use it. Get out into the country and use it.""
Mr Podesta, who was also a chief of staff to Bill Clinton, drew parallels with the former president's difficulties in his first
two years, which culminated in the 1994 Republican takeover of Congress following the failure of healthcare reform.
When asked whether the failure of this latest attempt at healthcare reform would result in a similar electoral
""massacre"" for the Democratic party at the mid-term elections in November, he said: ""I subscribe to that view.""
Mr Podesta founded the Centre for American Progress, Washington's largest liberal think-tank, which was often
described as a ""government-in-exile"" during the years George W. Bush was in the White House. He said Mr Obama had
three options with healthcare reform. First, try to enact the whole thing by using the budget reconciliation process,
which would enable it to pass with 51 votes. The Democrats lost their controlling 60-seat super-majority last month in a
election defeat in Massachusetts.
The second would be to pass a watered down bill with Republican support The third would be to abandon the attempt,
as Mr Clinton did in 1993.
Mr Podesta, whom Mr Obama still regularly consults, said there was still a better than 50:50 chance of getting reform
through. ""The worst option among the three is doing nothing, and so they're going to have to figure out which track is
viable,"" he said. ""It may mean doing it with only Democratic votes. But if that is such, then so be it.""
He painted a fairly bleak view of the overall health of US politics. ""It sucks,"" he said. Pointing to a strategy of
obstructionism by Republican lawmakers, he said: ""I think the president is trying to re-engage with Republicans, but,
quite frankly, he's not dealing with the party of [Abraham] Lincoln. He's dealing with the party of [Sarah] Palin.""
The growth of partisanship and the increasing difficulty in getting any big reforms through the Senate were threatening
to turn the US into, ""in essence, a parliamentary system without majority rule"", where the opposition automatically
opposes any serious initiatives.
The political stasis in California provided the writing on the wall for the US as a whole, he said. Since the 1978 passage of
Proposition 13 in the state, all budget changes had required a two-thirds majority. ""And so nothing gets done.""
Michael H. Fuchs
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-1709
(cell) B6"
144;"Madam Secretary,
Attached and below, please find a list of the issues I cover.
Thanks,
Mike
MEMORANDUM
TO: Secretary Clinton
FROM: Mike
CC: Cheryl, Jake
SUBJECT: Issues I Cover
In addition to the day-to-day projects and follow-up items I work on with Jake, I cover the following issues:
Long-Range Policy
O Helping Cheryl and Jake plan for, and follow-up on, the bi-monthly policy meetings
O Working with bureaus on end-of-year reports follow-up
O Keeping up to speed on issues discussed at Deputies meetings for weekly memos
O Helping shepherd speech ideas and providing feedback on drafts
Substantive Issue Areas
o Human rights/democracy
O Sudan
O Mexico
o Cookstoves
O Yemen-related issues
O Export controls
O Cybersecurity
O Terrorist finance issues
O Military families issues
O Climate change
• Dialogues and partnerships with Nigeria, South Africa, Angola, Indonesia, Brazil
State Department Reform
• Report reform: Working with Rich Verma and his team on reforming state's system for producing annual reports
to Congress
• QDDR-related assistance"
144;"Madam Secretary,
Jake asked me to send you a brief update on the effort to create an internal USG website for housing interagency
information about the attitudes, concerns, and media habits of foreign audiences (following up on the memo INR sent to
you on this subject in February).
INR is working with the interagency to create six initial country pages (Indonesia, Iraq, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Iran, and
Yemen) on this website. In addition to background information about each country and its relationship with the United
States, each page will focus on providing up to date information on how local audiences view the United States and an
analysis of the mediums through which local audiences get their news. Pages will also include a list effective messaging
themes that would resonate with target audiences in each country.
In the coming weeks, INR will be receiving interagency feedback on these initial draft web pages, and will be seeking
guidance as to which additional countries should be covered. The hope is that each page will evolve over time based on
user feedback.
Please let me know if you would like any further information.
Thanks,
Mike
Michael H. Fuchs
U.S. De artment of State"
144;"NEA is asking for a statement from you on the sentencing of Syrian human rights activists. White House released a
statement on this. Draft below:
Statement by Secretary Clinton
Syrian Convictions of Human Rights Activists
The sentencing of Syrian lawyer Haitham Maleh to three years in prison is an example of Syria's failure to comply with
minimum international human rights standards. Convicting Maleh for exercising free speech and defending universal
human rights sends a clear message to the world that Syria does not tolerate peaceful forms of expression. We call on
the Syrian government to meet its responsibilities under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. It
should demonstrate its commitment to international legal norms by releasing Maleh and other Syrian citizens, including
Muhannad al-Hassani and Ali Abdullah, who have been imprisoned solely for seeking to exercise their most fundamental
human rights.
###"
144;"Madam Secretary,
Jake mentioned that you asked for more information about a proposal made in 2005 for a global CT organization, and he
asked me to find out a little about it. Below is some brief information on the proposal, which was made by Saudi Arabia:
The proposal made by the then crown prince (now king) in Feb. 2005 called for the establishment of an international
counterterrorism center ""under the auspices of the UN."" The purpose of the organization would be to, among other
things, ""develop a mechanism for exchanging information and expertise between States"" on a wide range of non-
military counterterrorism issues, encourage the establishment of national and regional centers, and provide assistance
to developing countries to deal with crises and terrorist acts. The center, as conceived in 2005, would also allow national
counterterrorism coordinators from different countries and regions to meet and share information and experiences.
This proposal was endorsed by the OIC (and OIC countries reaffirm their support for the center each year at the UNGA),
but has never received any serious consideration within the UN by non-OIC members. The Saudis continue to be
interested in implementing the proposal. Most significantly, recently there have been discussions between the UN and
Saudis as to how their proposal could be married with efforts to enhance the UN's capacity to support implementation
of the UN Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy by allowing the UN Counter-Terrorism Task Force (CTITF) Office and the
different CTITF member entities to engage more actively and directly with CT experts/practitioners in capitals and have
multilateral CT consultations wherever necessary.
But S/CT mentioned that, if we were to move forward
on S/CT's CFO idea, we would hope to work closely with the Saudis.
Please let me know if you would like any further info.
Thanks,
Mike
Michael H. Fuchs
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-1709
(cell)"
144;"Madam Secretary,
In advance of your meeting tomorrow with George Soros, below is some information in response to the letter you
received from Soros proposing increased USG support for the American University of Central Asia (AUCA). SCA favors
providing more USG support for AUCA
Since 9/11 the United States has provided more than $15 million to AUCA in support of its endowment and various
other initiatives. For a majority of these contributions the Soros Foundation matched one dollar for every two dollars
provided by the USG. The major USG contributions to AUCA were two grants to the university endowment, the first in
2003 for $10 million, the second in 2008 for $3 million. Other USG support for AUCA included funding for two advisors to
the AUCA president on accreditation and development, support for the journalism faculty, and scholarship funds for
students from Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Afghanistan to attend the university.
Soros has proposed that the USG increase this support, offering a 1-1 match of $10 million each from State and his
foundation, totaling $20 million over the next five years. Last fall SCA received the same proposal from Soros, and they
have been discussing the issue with Soros' staff.
A little bit of additional information from SCA on AUCA: The university has made significant progress this year on a
number of its key objectives and remains a unique institution in Central Asia, a place where students are judged solely
on merit and a forum for free expression and critical thinking. The university achieved an important milestone this year
related to its U.S. accreditation, signing an agreement with Bard College under which AUCA graduates starting next May
will receive full diplomas from Bard College, an institution accredited in the United States. In addition, AUCA recently
established a new partnership with the American University in Kabul facilitated through state of the art video classroom
technology and recently announced the appointment of Andrew Wachtel, from Northwestern University, as the new
AUCA president who will take office this summer.
I will include this note (in addition to Soros' letter) in your materials for your meeting with Soros tomorrow. Please let
me know if you would like any further information.
Thanks,
Mike
Michael H. Fuchs
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-1709"
144;"Madam Secretary,
Following up on your trip to Ecuador, Jake asked me to send you a quick update on the Financial Action Task Force's
(FATF) listing of Ecuador:
(SBU) On June 25 the FATF moved Ecuador down a notch from a list of countries with serious strategic deficiencies in
measures against money laundering and financing terrorism. Ecuador is now on the ""Improving AML/CFT Compliance:
On-going Process"" list for showing progress in its efforts against money laundering and financing terrorism.
(SBU) According to Treasury, the change in Ecuador's status stems from its commitment to an action plan with the FATF,
and the GOE's demonstrated high-level political commitment to work toward AML/CFT (anti-money laundering —
combating the financing of terrorism) compliance.
WHA is looking into options for next steps.
Please let me know if you would like any further information.
Best,
Mike
Michael H. Fuchs
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-1709
(cell)"
144;"Madam Secretary,
As requested, below is a brief bio (compiled by DK, INR, and AF) of Kenyan Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs Richard
Momoima Onyonka, who you met in Krakow at the Community of Democracies. Please let me know if you would like
any further information or follow up on this.
Thanks,
Mike
Richard Momoima Onyonka is a Kenyan politician and belongs to the People's Democratic Party. Born in 1962 and
hailing from the Bogeka clan, VM Momoima has lived in Otamba, Nyamataro, Mosocho and Nairobi. In 1982, following
the failed Kenyan coup d'etat attempt to overthrow President Daniel Arap Moi's government, VM Momoima was among
the 900 people that were jailed. However, in 1984, he returned to the University of Nairobi and graduated with a
Bachelors degree in commerce a year later. After graduation, VM Momoima attended North Carolina State University
where he graduated with a Masters degree in management. He returned to Kenya in 1992 during the first multi party
elections to help his father (then incumbent MP for Kitutu Chache and Minister for Planning and National Development)
who was seeking re-election on a KANU (Kenya African National Union) ticket. VM Momoima's first political opportunity
arose when his father passed away in 1996, which prompted an election in which he lost to a new corner during the
party (KANU) nominations. Since the Kenyan parliamentary election in 2007, VM Momoima has represented the Kitutu
Chache Constituency in the National Assembly of Kenya.
A financial economist by profession, VM Momoima currently runs personal businesses in Nairobi and Kisii and has held
positions in the Kisii KANU branch. His priorities include economic empowerment, particularly for youth and women,
education, and poverty reduction.
Michael H. Fuchs
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-1709
B6"
144;Yes, I'll see if we can locate that
144;"Madam Secretary,
I received the copy of the draft night note on the Colombia and Panama FTAs that you reviewed, but I did not see any
notes/guidance on it. Would you like to B5
Thanks,
Mike
Michael H. Fuchs
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-1709
(cell) B6"
144;"Madam Secretary,
In advance of your meeting with Senator Kerry this afternoon, below is a short note on the current state of play of Sudan
policy discussions.
Mike
B5
B5
B5
B5
Michael H. Fuchs
U.S. Department of State
(202) 647-1709
(cell) B6"
144;"Will do
Fuchs, Michael H <FuchsMH@state.gov>
Monday, December 6, 2010 8:27 AM
Re:"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
204;I will be on travel from 12/8 through 12/20 — back in the office on the 21st..
204;"Thanks so much. I think that, given what was possible, we got a very good result.
Thanks for all your unwavering support throughout the year and for the pivotal role you played in the final 48 hours.
Your diplomacy Thursday was hugely important, starting to shift things in our direction, and then the President's
intervention Friday put us over the top. An awesome 1-2 punch -- the best in the whole wide world. I'm honored every
single day to work for you. Hope you get some rest over the holidays. Best, Todd"
204;"Stern, Todd D (S/SECC) <SternTD@state.gov>
Sunday, January 3, 2010 1:33 PM
Huma Abedin; Stern, Todd D (S/SECC)
Re: Question
Hi. Hope you've gotten some rest! We're at O'Hare on way back to DC
Todd"
204;"Hi. I'm very sorry, but I just saw this. Don't know how it escaped my attention. I will track it down tomorrow. I don't
know off hand. Hope you had a good Thanksgiving. Jen and kids and I were in Chicago. See you tomorrow."
204;"Hi. Sorry I haven't had a chance to see you, but I did want you to hear directly from me that it was a great result in
Cancun. Way beyond any expectations. Many challenges ahead, but a very good day for us and a great day for Mexico.
Have a very happy holiday if I don't see you before. Best, Todd"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
112;I do not know her but I will call her. Does Lauren have her info?
112;Will do
112;"Hope you are doing well after your surgery today. So sorry you have to deal with this. A couple items:
- Tom Donohue reports that he called Inouye today and he listened, asked O's but did not commit
- I don't want to get overconfident but we had a very good week on the Expo. Pepsi at $5M, Microsoft at $1M, Corning
at $500K (privately).
- Great mtg today at GE with about 20 corporations. 15 said they would look at it seriously. I think this has turned
around. Spoke to Ginsberg, Sosnik (NBA), Mantz and they are engaged.
Get well.
Kris"
112;"I just sent talking points to Huma regarding your interview with Mark Landler on the Shanghai Expo
Sorry I had to miss the Senate office festivities at Tamera's last night. Heard it was great.
Merry Christmas to you and Chelsea and the President. Your family has been wonderful to me and my family over the
years. Thank you.
Kris"
112;Sounds great. Will do.
112;"Mark
Thnx for the offer to help on Expo. I can send you the full list tomorrow. Would be happy to download in the am.
Dell, Intel, Microsoft (and about 20 others) all in but HP is not and Ford despite our best efforts keeps turning us down -
they are the only major global auto company not represented in Shanghai (Blanchard and Gephardt going back at them
yet again this week). Oracle, Alt, ADM, Monsanto, and financial and insurance companies among the other logical
companies not in yet.
Will call you in the am
Kris"
112;"I noticed on your schedule that you are meeting with a number of tech CEO's this evening. Google should be an obvious
co-sponsor of the USA Pavilion and they have consistently pushed us off. Although they bring up IP issues as a reason
not to participate, the Chinese frequently note that they do a lot of business in China. We are now at $54 million. If the
opportunity arises, it would be helpful to note the importance of a USA standing in Shanghai."
112;"Google has been wierd about this whole deal but this whole Espo experience has been fascinating. Some companies will
say absolutely no for months (Qualcomm, Bloomberg, J&J) and then pop out of nowhere and say yes. Others like AU are
in for nd then decide not to give us a penny. Therefore we have to keep bugging these guys.
We WILL raise the money. We are at $54M+ (this wk Hawaii came in for $500k and Bloomberg LLC and need $7M
more. Ideally we would like to raise $10 to 11M to cover any overruns (it's getting more expensive because the US was
so late we are paying more now to build it quicker).
Where it will come from?
A- Right now we have three big companies talking to us in the range of
Haier may go from If two or three come thru big we are done.
each - Monsanto, Disney, and Oracle.
B- We also have a number of other companies like Invitrogen, Hormel, Mattel and Major League Baseball in the
range.
C-Interestingly the cities and states are going to their private funders and trying to raise money on their own to
promote their jurisdictions - Chicago, Houston, Georgia, Montana, TN. (In the past, over 20 states participated with
public funds but current budgets are tough). Maybe a chat w Mayor Bloomberg would be worthwhile. For example, I
spoke to the University of WA and they will probably get benefactors to cosponsor at $250k making them the only
university represented.
D-We have approached groups like Pharma and the fashion industry thru Diane von Furstenburg to get them to bundle
smaller companies and both have agreed to do it. I met w DVL and she wants you to know that she is very excited about
helping (they are in therM range).
E- We have talked to the elusive Chamber of Commerce again about getting SME's to raise $2-3M in smaller increments.
They are contemplating it.
Finally the two obvious industries that are not involved are the banks (and we know why) and the insurance companies
who are starting to look into the market over there.
Anyway, I did not mean to go on and on but that's where we stand and these are the potential areas to tap. We'll get
there.
On your last Q - I too heard that"
112;"Its not like a traditional trade show/expo with specific booths. It is more subtle and the pavilion folks would negotiate
creatively on what they want..
Depdg on amount, they get on the big wall of contributors, we show multiple scenes of NYC in the shows and displays,
they can use the wonderful VIP lounge/auditorium to have NYC day or week at the Expo - the rockettes, Broadway goes
to China, commercial diplomacy, mtgs betwn NYC and Chinese officials, .getting SME's access to China etc. We could
really be creative.
LA, San Fran, San Antonio already in, chicago on way...
As you know the general theme is ""Better Cities, Better Lives"". How can NYC not be repped? They cam brag about their
innovations."
112;"Balderston, Kris M <BalderstonKM@state.gov>
Monday, January 11, 2010 12:43 PM
Abedin, Huma
Ben Feder"
112;Yup. Will do
112;"<<Call Sheet for S on Mayor Bloomberg.docx>> Attached is the call sheet you requested for Mayor Bloomberg. Thnx for
doing this.
Kris"
112;"Just a quick note to tell you that we are moving forward on the Expo funding. KIT came in at $500k, McGraw Hill at
$200k, Intel at $250k more, Delos Living (a Mantz client) $250k, and CITI at a minimum of $2M brings us down to $3.7M.
The following are on deck and likely to come in soon - Boeing (more), Carlyle, Blackstone, Alcoa, and AECOM. EB and I
chatting with many others."
112;Will do. Think we are in good shape. Immelt, Indra and Huntsman making calls. Mark Penn and Terry very helpful.
112;"Spoke to Joe and he is on board and all set re IFI. One concern is that Trini Vargo (frmr EMK staffer) is trying to redirect
money from IFI to her Irish Am Alliance for Mitchell scholarships. She will not succeed.
We'll work it out."
112;Thnx. I am happy to do the introduction.
112;"Thnx for talking to Wendell. Will do. Spoke to Tim already via email and he getting me paper and then we can discuss.
Also told him to have Wendell go to the Expo opening. Altho delayed could also have an impact."
112;"I have asked Jose to get you a more detailed report but I.must tell you the opening of the USA Pavilion has been a great
success so far - at least among the expo-goers. A few vignettes.
- while we don't want to brag to our Chinese hosts, our Pavilion has become the most popular. During the trial runs last
week, the Chinese expo-goers rushed directly from the gates to the USAP (and even broke some of our turn-styles).
Needless to say, the Chinese have improved security. On EACH of the first two days, 30,000 pple visited. Lines are long
and pple are loving the show. We are also getting many foreign officials to visit.
-the 100 US college student ambassadors (who act as guides and speak Mandarin) are the biggest hits of the pavilion.
Fair-goers stand in line to have their photo's taken w them. They explain the show and send a great message.
- the story line that we thght was simplistic is quite popular (the overture where Americans try to say hello in mandarin
is met w howls of laughter and Act ll called the Garden is doing well). During the thunderstorm scene a mist comes from
the ceiling and some pple put up their umbrellas. Act I is a bit too commercial but the audience claps and take photo's
when you and President come on the screen.
- we are selling tons of USA merchandise - the two most popular items - mini-basketballs with the USAP seal on it and
the bison stuffed animals - who knew?
Anyway, thght u'd enjoy the quick report. I cannot imagine us not being here! We will keep you posted.
Smart power works!"
112;In the process of doing that.
112;"Thnx on GPF. A lot of ideas out there.
Kurt and Hormats were looking into it. Will bug them in the am."
112;"Will do. Spoke to some of the participants and the NYSE folks and they were very happy about the meeting (they want to
make it an annual event)."
112;"Great news. Thanks for doing the call. We will get in touch to nail down their participation.
It has not been announced yet but we also learned that Shell Company is coming in as a founding member at $6M over
three years."
112;"We spoke to the Norway's Ambassador to the UN and they are joining the Alliance for Clean Cookstoves for $600,000
the first year. They noted that this is a down payment and would contribute a ""substantial amount for this endeavor"" in
the future. They wanted to move quickly for the CGI announcement and ant to see a business plan before they commit
more.
Thnx for making this important call. Other countries including France and Finland were waiting for the Norway signal."
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
25;"Button, Case <ButtonWC@state.gov>
Monday, January 18, 2010 9:38 PM
Re:
B6
Secretary-
Thank you so much for the well wishes. I have enjoyed working for you (everyday since
and am grateful for another year supporting the work you do.
Thank you again for the note. See you in HST!
Case"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
103;"Madame Secretary,
On Wednesday, you're scheduled to give a 15-minute talk at a gala hosted by the American Task Force on
Palestine, a moderate, pro-peace Palestinian-American organization. Here's a quick overview of our plans for
the speech, which we developed with NEA. Please let us know if you have any reactions.
The audience in the room will include Palestinian-Americans who are influential in their communities: lawyers,
doctors, business leaders, etc. Of course, a much larger audience beyond the room will read this speech as
well. This is your first opportunity to address this issue in a serious way since the end of the moratorium.
Key points:
###"
103;Of course. We're working on the deliverables now per your request.
103;"Here's a draft of your introductory letter for the QDDR. Jake and Anne-Marie have weighed in.
One question that's been raised is whether
Thanks,
Josh"
103;"That's right; we mean 09. We'll fix it. Thanks.
Sent via Blackberry."
103;"It's at the bottom of page 1:
...Ambassador Richard Holbrooke. This is a huge loss for our Department and our country, and we are dedicating this
first QDDR to his memory. Because every day, I see many of the qualities that made Richard great ..."
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
142;"Ma'am — Jake tells me that you are tired of the Lamplighter story. I'm sorry, I didn't know. But the Belfast people have
come up with a FANTASTIC story -- apparently, as per your request, they have tracked down the two kids who won the
peace essay contest in the 90s, and they are doing great things -- one is a teacher, one is a police officer. They are now
reaching out to get permission for you to tell their stories tomorrow night; assuming they will grant it, I am writing up
their stories now and will fax a revised draft to you shortly.
Sorry for the Lamplighter redux; I'll let Lissa know it's off-limits for at least a few years."
142;Great! Will do.
142;No -- I will add.
142;"Thank you for the kind words! It meant so much to see you speak, and was wonderful to witness that room full of
energetic women and men clapping and nodding--a microcosm of the global movement. I loved the additional stories
you told, esp the women working in the fields and how they could shut down the economy on their own in one swoop.
I'm hard at work on Ireland -- feeling my nationalism stirring!
Thank you again for the email and the chance to join you in NY."
142;I'll get on all these. And yes you will have a teleprompter.
142;"No!! And I'm clearly CCd; I have no idea why I missed this.
I will make these edits immediately and send to you, Huma, and Jake."
142;Great.
142;"Great to hear.
I'm also now working on a final round of edits from Jack, Eric, Raj, and others -- also trimming and improving the flow of
the speech a bit. You'll get this revised draft tonight. If you think it is improved, we'll use it, or we can use the draft you
made your changes to, if you'd prefer.
Lissa will be in the office tomorrow to handle your edits.
You will have a teleprompter.
No reason that I know of not to include Zuma; I will add a reference.
Thank you!"
142;"Will do! Thank you.
-----"
142;"Madam Secretary,
I'm writing remarks for your town hall in Sarajevo on Tuesday. Jake and Josh discussed having the
speechwriters send you bullets summarizing significant remarks ahead of time, so you can know the direction
we're taking and let us know if we're on the right or wrong track.
Below are the main points for Sarajevo; the draft I'm writing is covering this ground. It will follow the flow of
many of your previous town hall appearances.
If there is anything you'd like me to emphasize, add, or subject, let me know and I'll go for it.
Thanks very much,
Megan
•
•
•
•"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
44;"I will be out of the office until January 3rd. For immediate assistance please contact the D(L) staff assistants. Many
thanks, Dana"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
218;"Secretary Clinton and Huma!
Hope you're both well. The DVD screener should arrive at Huma's sometime this morning.
I can't wait for to hear what you think of the film and, if you have the time, how we can strengthen themes and sections
to make it a more relevant and effective educational and policy influencing tool. We are currently at various stages of
reaching out or building partnerships with a wide variety of organizations from Facing History and Ourselves to JStreet to
the Marine Corps to the United Nations
(informally) to various think tanks, and human rights organizations.
We have big plans for the film and hope to use it as a platform to foster critical cross-cultural conversations.
And a disclaimer- the film is still a work in progress. We are drastically changing the intro, moving some sections around,
and adding a story about the Marines sending senior Marine Officers to Jordan to negotiate and build partnerships with
Al Anbar's exiled tribal leaders.
I am so excited for you to see it.
Have a safe trip, I hope to see you soon, and all the best,
Love,
Zach
Zachary J. Iscol
The Editorial Project
www.editorialproject.com
www.thewesternfrontmovie.com"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
216;"Your remarks this afternoon at Andrews were wonderful. Thanks for doing so much for our institution on such a sad
day.
Just sent you a hi side note on visits taJordan and Iraq, and look forward to catching up. Enjoy the weekend in the
meantime.
Bill
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739626
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-SCB0045325"
216;"Many thanks. Will do my best. Get well soon, and have a wonderful holiday. I'm very lucky to serve in your State
Department."
216;"Madam Secretary,
Thanks again. n1send the Princeton speech text to Jake. On Libya, I did talk to New York -- the Libyans did
not object to our text in the end, and we're on track for adoption of statement this afternoon. All best, Bill"
216;"You did a really fine job on Meet the Press today. The Russia, Iran, Afghanistan and Asia points were all right
on the mark. And even though it goes beyond my professional scope, the second half was just as good. Enjoy
the rest of the weekend.
Bill Classified by DAS, A/GIS, DoS on 06/30/2015 — Class:
07/25/2024"
216;Will do. Egy, Turkey, Brazil and S Af all abstained. Egy at least made strong EOV.
216;I will be out of the office until Tuesday, January 19.
216;Thanks. Got it. Hope they will think carefully on VP. Will follow up on other items.
216;Will do. 111 talk to Ryabkov in the morning. Bill
216;"Will follow up on ""memo"" and Silicon Valley. Have a good weekend. Bill"
216;"Enjoy the beach, and all best.
B1
1.4(B)
1.4(D)
on: 08/21/2020"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
105;"Judith McHale
Wednesday, September 12, 2012 8:54 AM
Libya
B6
The news from Libya is truly shocking. Just wanted you to know that you, all my colleagues at State and the
Stevens family are in my thoughts and prayers.
Tough world we live in my friend.
Take care of yourself.
Judith
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739910
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045246"
105;Our Posts at work.
105;"McHale, Judith A <McHaleJA@state.gov>
Friday, January 29, 2010 6:47 AM
Re: a couple of powerful quotes from foreign media which we highlighted in our cable
Thx. Had a great conversation with Doug Hattaway.
Will fill you in when I see you.
Also working with Amb Pascual on a new strategy for Mexicom
Finally working with Cheryl to help GoH with communication from g to p.
On my way to India and bangalesh."
105;"Will give some thought and pass along any names I can think of.
Jm"
105;"I get back the morning of February 9 and will be in the office that afternoon. I'll email you and Lona a copy of my
schedule. Walter Douglas and Dan Sreebney have been working with me on Haiti. Walter is in California for Victoria
DeLongh's funeral and will be back in the office Tuesday. He has been working closely with Dan Smith on the Haiti
initiative. Let me know if there is anything you need me to do from here.
im"
105;"I'm sorry I was not able to join last week's meeting on Haiti but I have calls into Anne Marie and Arturo to get an update.
Once I get a better understanding of how we plan to move forward on a regional basis we will work on putting together
a comprehensive PD strategy to support our efforts
If you like the idea I can begin to trial balloon it with media execs in US and LA that I know
personally to gauge their reaction.
Of course we can't rely on a psa campaign alone to sustain the effort so we will develop other PD strategies for
engagement throughout the region which I will forward as they evolve.
Let me know what you think. In the meantime I thought you might be interested in the report below (copy attached as
well) which outlines the results to date of our global media outreach initiative.
Successfully Engaging Global Media
About the U.S. Role and International Cooperation in Haiti
Examples of Post Efforts to Date
EUROPE
• Reinforcing the Secretary's message, U.S. Ambassador to France Rivkin engaged directly
with over 100 journalists in an event streamed live on-line by CNN, where he highlighted
U.S. assistance to Haiti and the cooperation of the US with France, the UN and the
international community. Embassy Paris also reached out to senior officials in the Elysee,
MFA, French media and civil society at all levels to underscore the message of positive
coordination with our French partners and to set the record straight on the work of the USG
in Haiti. As a result, leading French officials dismissed rumors of rising diplomatic tensions
between the two countries. Leading officials consistently praised the work of the Obama
administration in Haiti and the need for a strong US role in the emergency response.
• Embassy London's media blitz featured Ambassador Susman, who underlined the U.S.
commitment to Haiti at an Embassy Martin Luther King Jr. holiday event with actor James
Earl Jones; the event was covered by BBC World News (audience 270 million worldwide)
and various U.K. papers. The Ambassador and the JO also spoke about Haiti on January 20-
22 on BBC TV 2's ""Daily Politics Show,"" BBC Radio, the BBC TV Evening News, and
other media and helped embed an ITV journalist on the USNS Comfort to help balance ITV's
previously negative reporting and reached out personally to BBC producers to call attention
to inaccurate reporting alleging that the U.S. military prevented Medicins Sans Frontiers
from delivering aid and supplies to the airport in Port Au Prince.
• With media coverage growing more critical, U.S. Ambassador to Greece Speckhard gave an
interview to Ta Nea newspaper and DCM Deborah McCarthy, who previously served in
Haiti, was interviewed by Real Sunday newspaper, resulting in positive stories about U.S.
assistance to Haiti. Meanwhile, the PAO spoke with the Director of Elefterotypia, whose
paper has run some of the most misdirected coverage of Haiti, and received a commitment to
run an Embassy-produced story to counteract the misinformation.
AFRICA
• Four African posts — Senegal, Ghana, Nigeria and Tanzania — organized highly successful
outreach programs based on the diversion of the USS Gunston Hall to Haiti. The ship, with
African officers aboard, was headed to western Africa under AFRICOM' s African
Partnership Station maritime security training program when it was diverted to provide relief
to Haiti. With African officers working alongside U.S. military officers to deliver assistance
to Haitians, PAOs at those posts connected local reporters with the ship to conduct live
interviews of the Africans for their home media, resulting in excellent media placement in all
four countries.
• On January 20 U.S. Ambassador to South Africa Gips gave a 10-minute live interview on
Haiti with 5FM, a leading youth station with listenership of approx 800,000. The
Ambassador highlighted the depth and breadth of US support and congratulated South Africa
for sending emergency teams. The radio hosts told the Embassy afterward that e-mails and
SMS messages were pouring into the station in support of U.S. efforts. Ambassador Gips
reached out to additional audiences via broadcast media on January 21 and recorded a
program via the Africa Regional Media Hub with SABC-International TV's ""Rendezvous
Africa"" program (broadcast across the continent) and live interviews with drive-time radio
programs on two national stations.
• As a result of a press conference hosted by the Embassy on January 22, all major Angolan
media gave positive coverage to U.S. efforts in Haiti, including Radio Nacional de Angola
and the Jornal de Angola newspaper, which ran an editorial January 23 that stated: ""We need
to believe and let those on the ground do their work because the old tactics of criticizing who
is doing something for the Haitian People just for the sake of criticizing at a moment like this
is not acceptable. . . Just see the numbers of daily flights that arrive in Haiti to have an idea
and quickly come to the conclusion that the possible failures and omissions do not supersede
the positive and timely work done by the entities undertaking the relief efforts in Haiti.""
EAST ASIA-PACIFIC
• The U.S. Ambassador to Indonesia's January 21 byliner on Haiti ran as the lead item on the
editorial page of Sep utar Indonesia daily, and it was subsequently picked up by Antara, the
Indonesian national news agency, and subsequently appeared in most Indonesian media.
• South Korea: Looking to help Korean audiences connect with the situation in Haiti, PA
Seoul arranged a Digital Video Conference with the U.S. Consul in Nagoya, Japan, who had
previously served as Information Officer in Port-au-Prince and was a fluent Korean
speaker. CG Kwak underlined the long tradition of US humanitarian assistance to Haiti as
well as the massive US response to the current crisis and noted Korea's own active
involvement in the relief work. The U.S. Ambassador's blog on January 22, dedicated to the
earthquake and those affected by it, received more than 1,500 hits in three days, with almost
all comments supporting U.S. concerns.
The EAP Regional Media Hub in Tokyo hosted a journalists' roundtable with Gordon Duguid
in Haiti on January 25 that included journalists from Hong Kong's Ming Pao newspaper,
Malaysia's New Straits Times newspaper, BERNAM.A (Malaysian National News Agency),
and Australia's Canberra Times newspaper and Radio 6PR (Perth), and resulted in favorable
stories appearing over the next few days in all participating media.
NEAR EAST
• Lebanon: Television station Al-Jadid is not Hezbollah-affiliated, with most of its funding
coming from the Gulf and Libya. Their coverage is also routinely sensationalistic and
mirrored Al-Manar's coverage. PAS Beirut clarified aspects of USG assistance in Haiti to
Al-Jadid on January 20. On Saturday January 23, Al-Jadid hosted the PAO for 30 minutes
on morning news talk-show al-Hadath to discuss American relief efforts in Haiti. The PAO
was able to address many of the accusations carried in the Al-Manar report, including the
myriad ""weapons testing"" myths being propagated by Russian and Venezuelan media outlets.
[Post cannot engage directly with Hezbollah television station Al-Manar as it was designated
as a Special Designated Global Terrorist organization in 2006 under E.O. 13224]
• Morocco: On 1/28/10 the nationalist French-language daily L 'Opinion published an op-ed
entitled, ""Haiti: After terror, the dread..."" The paper is generally considered to be fairly
hostile to the USG, however, on 1/29/10, PAO Rabat and an FSN went to L 'Opinion to
discuss the op-ed. Post was amazed to find the staff, including the writer himself,
accommodating and even apologetic during the meeting. The editor-in-chief immediately
agreed that the piece had been unfair, and the writer somewhat sheepishly explained himself
by saying that public opinion had not quite recovered from ""the Bush years,"" but readily
acknowledged as well that the article was not balanced. PAO gave the writer a dossier of
Washington File articles and some information from Infocentral's regular updates, which he
promised to use in writing a counterpoint article. On 2/1/10, L 'Opinion published an article
entitled, ""The massive humanitarian action of the United States,"" based on the articles
provided by Post. The excellent article underscored the scope of American assistance, both
government and private sector, to aide Haiti's earthquake victims.
• Syria: Syrian state-run media coverage of the USG role in Haiti relief efforts has been
largely negative and inaccurate, portraying the U.S. military as occupying Haiti. Examples
include the Ba'ath party's Al-Baath newspaper publishing three critical articles (1/21/01)
under the headlines: ""US Crimes in Haiti,"" ""US Military Forces Tighten Grip on Haiti,"" and
""US Forces Stop Humanitarian Planes from Landing."" On 1/25/10, government-owned
Tishreen published an op-ed claiming that the superpowers were rushing towards a military
conquest of Haiti in order to profit from reconstruction operations, which is the new method
of colonialism. On 1/28/10, DAS Maura Connelly met with Syrian Ambassador Mustafa,
who promised to work to halt the negative coverage coming from some Syrian outlets. To
encourage more balanced coverage, Embassy Damascus will host a roundtable 2/3/10 with
-
journalists from government-owned and independent Syrian media. Post also extended a
personal invitation to an advisor of the Minister of Information."
105;"Thought you might be interested in this piece by Joe Nye which I believe validates the new approach we are trying to
implement. We have begun to roll-out the new plan and so far the reaction has been reasonably positive. We have
organized a set of working groups around key initiatives --- women's empowerment; cve; expanded English language
training; cultural programming; youth; climate change; etc so that we can incorporate new proposals into FY2012
budget and re-direct FY 2010 and 2011 funds wherever possible and appropriate. The working groups are being chaired
by senior level officers from the regional bureaus --- Bob Blake; Craig Kelly, etc. --- and are being asked to report back
within 4 to 6 weeks. I'll continue to keep you posted as things move forward.
The New Public Diplomacy
Joseph S. Nye
2010-02-10
CAMBRIDGE — The world of traditional power politics was typically about whose military or economy would
win. In today's information age, politics is also about whose ""story"" wins.
National narratives are, indeed, a type of currency. Governments compete with each other and with other
organizations to enhance their own credibility and weaken that of their opponents. Witness the contest between
the government and protesters after the Iranian elections in June 2009, in which the Internet and Twitter played
crucial roles, or the recent controversy between Google and China.
Reputation has always mattered in world politics, but credibility has become crucial because of a ""paradox of
plenty."" When information is plentiful, the scarce resource is attention. Under the new conditions, a soft sell
may, more than ever, prove more effective than a hard sell.
For example, the relative independence of the BBC, sometimes a source of consternation to British
governments, has paid rich dividends in credibility, as illustrated by this account of Tanzanian President Jakaya
Kikwete's day: ""he rises at dawn, listens to the BBC World Service, then scans the Tanzanian press.""
Skeptics who treat the term ""public diplomacy"" as a mere euphemism for propaganda miss the point. Simple
propaganda is counterproductive as public diplomacy. Nor is public diplomacy merely a public-relations
campaign. Public diplomacy also involves building long-term relationships that create an enabling environment
for government policies.
The contribution of direct government information to long-term cultural relationships varies with three
dimensions or stages of public diplomacy, and all three are important. The first and most immediate dimension
is daily communications, which involves explaining the context of domestic and foreign-policy decisions. This
dimension also involves preparation for dealing with crises. If there is a vacuum in information after an event,
others will rush in to fill it.
The second dimension is strategic communication, which develops a set of simple themes, much as a political
or advertising campaign does. While the first dimension is measured in hours and days, the second occurs over
weeks, months, and even years.
The third dimension of public diplomacy is the development of lasting relationships with key individuals over
many years or even decades, through scholarships, exchanges, training, seminars, conferences, and access to
media channels. These programs develop what the American journalist Edward R. Murrow once called the
crucial ""last three feet"" — face-to-face communications, with the enhanced credibility that reciprocity creates.
But even the best advertising cannot sell an unpopular product. A communications strategy cannot work if it
cuts against the grain of policy. Actions speak louder than words. All too often, policymakers treat public
diplomacy as a bandage that can be applied after damage is done by other instruments. For example, China tried
to enhance its soft power by successfully staging the 2008 Olympics, but its domestic simultaneous crackdown
in Tibet — and subsequent repression in Xinxiang and arrests of human rights lawyers — undercut its gains.
Great powers try to use culture and narrative to create soft power that promotes their advantage, but they do not
always understand how to do it. Critics in the United States complain that the over-militarization of foreign
policy undercuts its credibility. Instead, they advocate diplomacy ""on steroids,"" staffed by diplomats trained in
new media, cross-cultural communications, granular local knowledge, and networks of contacts with under-
represented groups.
The centralized mass-media approach to public diplomacy still plays an important role. Governments need to
correct daily misrepresentations of their policies, as well as to try to convey a longer-term strategic message.
The main strength of the mass-media approach is its audience reach and ability to generate public awareness
and set the agenda. But its weakness is its inability to influence how the message is perceived in different
cultural settings. The sender knows what she says, but not always what the targets hear. Cultural barriers are apt
to distort what is heard.
Networked communications, on the other hand, can take advantage of two-way communications and peer-to-
peer relations to overcome cultural differences. This type of decentralization and flexibility is difficult for
governments to accomplish, given their central accountability structures.
The greater flexibility of non-governmental organizations in using networks has given rise to what some call
""the new public diplomacy,"" which is no longer confined to messaging, promotion campaigns, or even direct
governmental contacts with foreign publics serving foreign-policy purposes. It is also about building
relationships with civil-society actors in other countries and facilitating networks between non-governmental
parties at home and abroad.
In this approach to public diplomacy, government policy is aimed at promoting and participating in, rather than
controlling, such cross-border networks. Indeed, too much government control, or even the appearance of it, can
undercut the credibility that such networks are designed to engender. The evolution of public diplomacy from
one-way communications to a two-way dialogue treats publics as co-creators of meaning and communication.
Power in a global information age, more than ever, will include a soft dimension of attraction as well as the hard
dimensions of coercion and payment. Combining these dimensions effectively is called ""smart power."" For
-
example, the current struggle against transnational terrorism is a struggle over winning hearts and minds, and
over-reliance on hard power alone is not the path to success.
Public diplomacy is an important tool in the arsenal of smart power, but smart public diplomacy requires an
understanding of credibility, self-criticism, and the role of civil society in generating soft power. If it
degenerates into propaganda, public diplomacy not only fails to convince, but can undercut soft power. Instead,
it must remain a two-way process, because soft power depends, first and foremost, upon understanding the
minds of others."
105;"Yes. I am in all next week. 191 work with Lona to set up a time to meet.
im"
105;"I think I mentioned to you that Carols Pascual has asked me to work with him on a public awareness campaign targeting
the Mexican public and designed to maintain support for the campaign against the drug cartels. The attached article,
which he wrote, addresses this issue. I have approached Keith Reinhard at Business for Diplomatic Action to work with
us on this matter. Keith thinks he can organize a US/Mexican creative coalition to work on it. Might be an interesting
model for Haiti if it works here.
Hope the trip is going well.
JM"
105;"I get these reports every morning. They are somewhat painful to read since, as you know, in Pakistan, the
media can be particularly outrageous. However, we can't ignore the fact that these talk shows are the most
watched programming in prime time.. The report below is fairly typical. The host sets up the discussion in
fairly provocative way and the guests, who come from across the political spectrum, respond. As you can
see, the first commentator is strongly anti US. However, what I, have observed since our media offensive
began last Fall is that there is usually a more moderate guest as well, who will argue along the lines that it is
only natural for the US to protect its interests and GOP should do a better job of protecting Pakistan. Believe it
or not there have even been instances where we get credit for some of the things we do. Also on occasion
where there have been particularly egregious attacks on US policy, the host will read a statement from our
Embassy in the following programming. We try to get airtime on these programs whenever possible but it is
hard. It 's a hard slog getting this right but we are making progress.
im"
105;fyi
105;"More photos. Hope you're having a lovely weekend. Hudson River is particularly exquisite today.
JM"
105;As we discussed yesterday
105;Interesting. Slight change of tone.
105;"Importance: High
See email chain below about media coverage of Afghanistan. I will work with SRAP to be sure we have a Haiti-like plan
in place for Afghanistan.
jmis"
105;"Great. I wonder if the problem has something to do with the fob system. Will let you know what I find out.
Jm"
105;"I've already met with him but will follow up again. Have an idea I think he may be able to help with.
Safe travels.
JM"
105;"As per your suggestion, I spoke with Roy Spence over the weekend and will be meeting with him on Wednesday to
discuss candidates for the International Information programs (IIP) position. Will let you know how it goes.
JM"
105;"03-23-2010.doc; Strategic Dialogue Press Clips March 24, 2010.doc; Strategic Dialogue
Press Clips 03-25-2010.doc; Strategic Dialogue Press Clips 03-26-2010.doc; Strategic
Dialogue Press Clips 03-27-2010.doc; Strategic Dialogue Press Clips 03-28-2010.doc;
Strategic Dialogue Press Clips 03-29-2010.doc; Strategic Dialogue Press Clips
03-30-2010.doc; Strategic Dialogue Press Clips 03-31-2010.doc
FYI, generally positive coverage.
im"
105;"Not for public acknowledgement but, as we have said, consistent engagement at the highest levels actually works.
Ibrahim is CEO of GEO and a major figure in Pakistani media circles."
105;"McHale, Judith A <McHaleJA@state.gov>
Friday, April 9, 2010 6:54 AM
H.
Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J
RE: recognition of USG assistance/contributions.
Will do. This is such a critical (and frustrating) issue that I want to try and start moving forward on it as soon as we can. I
know Raj wants to address this as well. I'd like to start off with a relatively small group of DoS and USAID reps, plus a
group top private sector brand and other ex erts. For exam .l
who is an incredible woman who is already helping me with youth engagement and who would B6
be terrific for this. In addition I'd like to reach out to people in the NGO and think tank community so we can get a broad
range of opinions.
Will keep you posted.
There is a difference of opinion within NEA that I am trying to sort out B5
but I will have something to you by next early week.
Finally, as I think you know,
I am working on a memo for you and Jim outlining the details.
im"
105;"FYI. Mostly good news. I am already focusing on Turkey. Met with my Turkish counter-part last week and have a trip
planned for early June.
I'll keep you posted as things move forward. Will also send you an email on the high side about my SSCI hearing last
week.
— Reason: 1.4(D) — Declassify on: 04/19/2020
1.4(D)
B1"
105;Example of our hitting back in action -- it works.
105;"I have sent Pi an email about this and will let you know what he thinks. I'm want to be sure we hit the Pakistani disapora
here and elsewhere."
105;"McHale, Judith A <McHaleJA@state.gov>
Monday, April 26, 2010 3:09 PM
Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J; DiMartino, Kitty; Douglas, Walter T; Macmanus, Joseph
FW: Update on your trip to Doha
FYI, I will be going to Doha this weekend to meet with Al Jazeera. Also plan to meet with CENTCOM and then onto Kabul
for two days of meetings. Back next Thursday.
im"
105;"I have attached a copy of the status report for the Pakistan Communications Plan which was approved last September.
You will note that we have made progress on many fronts. The Post has significantly increased its engagement with the
media and responds immediately to rumors and inaccurate stories. There has also been a significant increase in the
number of exchange participants. We are continuing to experience difficulty in filling critical positions and I am working
with Nancy Powell to address this issue.
Please let me know if you have any questions or comments.
JM"
105;"FYI, early read out of Pakistan media reaction to strategic dialogue. Not bad overall at this point.
Pakistan Media:
Coverage of the final round of the U.S.-Pak Strategic Dialogue dominated the front pages of all newspapers and
hourly bulletins of TV networks on Friday morning. Media highlighted reports that the U.S. and Pakistan
sought ""wide-ranging, long term and substantive partnership,"" and ""established a policy steering group for
further talks on strategic issues."" The signing of a letter of intent between the U.S. and Pakistan to help
reconstruction of priority roads in Malakand division also received prominent display. Secretary of Defense
Gates' meeting with his Pakistani counterpart, and his comments that the ""U.S. wants to increase the military
funding of Pakistan"" received coverage. Pak Army Chief General Kayani's remarks that the ""military is willing
to forgo its requests for hardware to ensure that Pakistan's energy and economic needs are met"" were also
reported. Reports that GOP and the opposition are not on same page regarding talks with the U.S. received
front-page display. The civilian nuclear deal issue made news as ""The News,"" reported that the ""FO seeks to
hide unease over nuclear snub"" and ""The Nation,"" reported on front-page that ""U.S. affirms durable partnership
but no civilian N-deal."" However Foreign Office spokesman's remarks, that the ""government is optimistic about
a positive outcome"" was also reported. Terming the U.S. commitment of $125 million for the power sector, as
""crucial,"" ""The News,"" noted in its editorial that ""it needs to be translated into action urgently."" Its sister mass-
circulated Urdu daily, ""Jang,"" however noted with a word of caution, that ""we think that the present U.S.
overtures to woo Pakistan are not completely altruistic. It remains to be seen what Washington wants from
Islamabad."" A prominent columnist, Ayesha Siddiqa noted in ""Dawn,"" that ""the U.S. might have realized that it
will have to listen to Pakistan and feel concerned about its inherent insecurity vis-a-vis India's role in
Afghanistan."""
105;"FYI. Good news on at least one front.
jm"
105;"Greetings from Nairobi. I'm at the end of week-long trip to Kampala, Kinshasa and now Nairobi. The trip has been very
productive and I will fill you in on some of the discussions I have been having when I return. In the meantime, I know
that there are a number of discussions with Dan Benjamin and others relating to a new more aggressive approach to
CVE and I wanted to update you on my thoughts in terms of how those critical discussions fit in with our overall
approach to strategic communications around the globe.
As you and I have discussed, it is essential that we become much more pro-active in all our communications efforts. To
put it bluntly, we are in an ""information war"" on all fronts. With the proliferation of media outlets and opportunities
around the world, we must fight aggressively to get, and maintain, our fair share of ""consumer share of mind."" Both our
adversaries and allies recognize the importance of this aspect of foreign policy and are adopting new ways of
communicating with foreign publics. Consumers everywhere are constantly facing a barrage of information and in some
cases misinformation and dis-information. In order to get our messages across and confront the threats posed by our
adversaries, we must develop a new sense of urgency in all our communications efforts. Much has been said and written
about the concept of ""soldier diplomats"". In the same vein, I believe we must empower a corps of ""diplomat soldiers"" to
help us gain ground in this new war.
While countering violent extremism is, and will remain, a key objective of our communications efforts we must apply the
same level of determination with respect to all communications. We must both aggressively promote positive stories
about the US and rapidly respond to attacks against us. In the past, our failure to respond to attacks and distortions has
diminished our credibility and undermined our ability to combat our adversaries. For example, had we not responded to
all the rumors and innuendos surrounding our relief efforts in Haiti, I believe we would have provided a fertile field for
AQ and others to continue to perpetuate the image of the US as an ""invader"".
Before I left for this trip, I convened a meeting of our top PD officers and told them that we must become much more
aggressive in our strategic communications programs and initiatives. We plan to implement daily calls between our new
regional PD DAS's and PAO's in the regions so we can monitor on a daily basis all stories about the USG. We will work
with the Posts to ensure that they have strategies for dealing with stories as they develop. I would also like to request
that you send a cable to all Chiefs of Mission informing of the new strategy and reminding them of their responsibilities
in this critical area. We will work on a draft for your review when you return.
Finally, we are developing new organizational solutions, modeled on an approach I saw at our Mission in Uganda, which
I think will greatly clarify roles and responsibilities with respect to in country communications not only within the
Mission, but across all government agencies within particular countries.
I will continue to update you as we move forward.
Hope your trip is going well. Look forward to greeting together when we are both back in DC.
JM"
105;"Fyi, a bit of Congressipnal outreach.
Jm"
105;fyi
105;"FYI. Thanks again for signing the book ---- and I do hope you get royalties from Mongolia! Also thought you would like to
see the attached letter to President Clinton."
105;"FYI
McHale, Judith A <McHaIeJA©state.goy>
Thursday, June 17, 2010 11:56 AM
Abedin, Huma; Sullivan, Jacob J; Mills, Cheryl D
FW: Pew Global Attitudes 22-Nation Poll"
105;"During the past year we have discussed the size of the Germany PD budget and the fact that it did not reflect current
priorities. EUR reviewed the budget and made the decision to cut the German PD budget by 30% and reallocate the
funding to other areas, primarily Eastern Europe. As you will see from the email below and the attached memo, Mission
Germany responded by reviewing all their PD operations and developing an entirely new approach based on the PD
strategic framework we rolled out earlier this year. I think they did an excellent job and we will be using this as a model
for other Missions as we go forward.
Let me know what you think.
jm"
105;fyi
105;"Importance:
fyi
McHale, Judith A <McHaleJA@state.gov>
Thursday, August 5, 2010 7:52 AM
H
FW: Ruto and the ""No"" team concede defeat in Kenya's Constitutional Referendum
High"
105;Fyi,
105;"FYI, a video and note that will make you smile.
Enjoy!
jm
1.Closing Wrap-up Video from Forum (produced by IIP and huge hit)
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uZ8kpXbql1c
2.Thank-you Letter from Cameroon Delegate to Embassy
Dear All,
Good morning from Washington DC. I trust that we are keeping well. I just want to use this opportunity to say that today
we come to the end of the program here on the President's Forum. All along this Forum and especially during the White
House meeting with President Obama, I have been asking myself what it means to be here in DC and to be representing
Cameroon at this forum?
I have recently come to the realization that the time is critical and that President Obama in his thinking about a new
Africa believes that young people whom we are, diverse and intelligently different can take little positive actions to
ensure that the next 50 years witnesses significant changes in our social processes, our political institutions, processes
and structures, our economic freedom, taking into consideration our cultural specificities.
While traveling to America, I kept imagining the moment when President Obama would tell us great and magical ways to
getting out of our current socio-economic and especially political hostage situations, but in all and after all the speeches,
conversations and interactions with Ordinary Americans like in the Southside of Washington DC, State Department Staff,
Senators, Secretary of State Clinton and President Obama, I noticed that America can only partner with us when we
decide to start thinking and acting differently in our quest for a better Cameroon and a better Africa.
This thinking differently is exemplified by the American Peace Corps, in the service leadership, the spirit of give back to
the nation and community and the transformation of challenges to opportunities in America and in many nations
around the world...
When our troubles and challenges seems gruesome and our vision blurred by the thought and fear of the unknown if we
dared, the one thing I come out with from this Forum is this, ""That we just have to Think, Speak out and above all, DARE
take some innovative ACTIONs to Be the change we want to see in our communities, nations and continent and commit
others to same by our examples...That we have to build strong networks and undertake advocacies as a group as
nothing has ever stopped a committed group of people to drive change aound the world.
The work to be done is enormous and challenging but sure the reward of every success like coming to America, to the
White House and meeting with President Obama is sweet. Therefore I come back to work to be the change I want to see
in Cameroon.
I thank you all for the opportunity."
105;"Development PLAN - ExecSum.docx
As you may be aware, earlier this year, OIG issued a very negative report on our Public Diplomacy operations
throughout Africa. I have attached a copy of the action plan which Johnnie and his team developed to address the
issues raised in the report. The plan is a very deliberate effort to address the shortcomings identified by the 01G, do a
better job of integrating public diplomacy and public affairs into the whole AF Bureau, and deliver better PD and PA
work.
I think it is an excellent report and provides a good model for the bureaus as we endeavor to create a new direction for
Public Diplomacy."
105;"McHale, Judith A <McHaleJA@state.gov>
Sunday, August 8, 2010 6:48 AM
Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J
FW: aid workers
im"
105;"Just spoke with David and RI. The bodies have been recovered and identified. Phillipe is working with Kabul on your
written statement. I raised the possibilty of your going on camera tomorrow and have asked Phillipe to weigh in on
message and timing.
Jm"
105;"I just got Huma's message about dinner. My blackberry died and I was recharging it so didn't have it with me. I would
have loved to have had dinner with you and Melanne and had a chance to catch up. Our meetings went well this
afternoon.
Hope the rest of the trip goes well. Look forward to seeing you next week. I'm heading down to Mexico on Wednesday
afternoon to work with Carlos on the strategic communications issues.
Safe travels.
Jm"
105;"Importance: High
FYI"
105;"FYI, I am forwarding you a message I just sent to Raj about the article in today's Washington Post.j
He and I agreed to work closely on this issue. I have asked INR to get us some research on the security issue which the
implementing partners frequently raise Note the comment in the
Post about the security situation.
As you know we are moving forward on the broader branding issue and plan to have a team of experts advise us as we
move forward.
I will keep you posted.
jm"
105;Jm
105;Ok
105;"Draft of email I will send to Denis today. Comments ?
DRAFT
Denis:
im"
105;Fyi, note I sent to Denis.
105;"Nice work from one of our star PAO's --- Joann Lockard in Kampala
im"
105;"See below. Terrific piece from the BBC which I will circulate.
Meant to mention yesterday that I am going to Buenos Aires, Montevideo and Santiago next week. In Buenos Aires and
Montevideo I will speaking at two business conferences being hosted by Council of the Americas and in Chile I will be
visiting some of the public diplomacy programs we launched after the earthquake.
You may recall that I have a long-standing relationship with Christina Kirchner going back to my Discovery days. We had
quite a large and successful business there. We are trying to arrange for me to meet with her when I am in BA
and Arturo has briefed me on points he would like me to make if I get to spend some time with her.
I thought yesterday went well although I think it is going to be hard going to keep the world interested and committed
to raising the necessary funding.
im"
105;"Nice piece on Cameron Munter.
Safe travels.
Jm"
105;"Not sure about SRAP. I'll forward it on. Hope the trip is going well.
Jm"
105;"FYI
The Christian Science Monitor - CSMonitor.com
War on terror: Obama softened the language, but
hardened Muslim hearts
The Obama administration's shift in counterterrorism language sought to bridge the divide with the Muslim world and soften Americans' fear of
Islam. But the new rhetoric hasn't matched policy, and the unintended costs at home and abroad have been high.
By Stuart Gottlieb
posted October 14, 2010 at 9:58 am EDT
New Haven, Conn. —
One of the most defining aspects of the Obama administration's counterterrorism strategy has been its effort to change America's rhetorical approach
to the threat of terrorism, particularly Islamic terrorism. ""The language we use matters,"" President Obama told the Arabic satellite television station
Al Arabiya in an interview during his first week in office. Scrubbed were George W. Bush-era terms like ""war on terrorism,"" ""radical Islam,"" and
""jihadist.""The White House's 2010 National Security Strategy formally replaced the term ""Islamic terrorism"" with ""violent extremism.""
The purpose of the shift in semantics was two-fold.
First, it aimed to repackage the fight against terrorism as a specific fight against Al Qaeda, not against Islamic extremism, which Mr. Obama believes
contributed to a post-9/11 perception that America was ""at war with Islam."" Indeed, the new rhetoric has gone hand in hand with Obama's outreach to
the Muslim world to build ""a new partnership based on mutual respect and mutual interest.""
Second, it was part of a broader effort to soften Americans' fear of Islamic terrorism, which Obama officials believe plays directly into the hands of
extremists.
Language change ineffective
Now it is fair to ask whether Obama's use of language regarding terrorism has proven effective. Startling new polls suggest it hasn't. The first, by the
Brookings Institution in Washington, shows that between May 2009 and May 2010 the number of Middle Eastern Arabs expressing optimism in
Obama's approach toward their region dropped from 51 percent to just 16 percent, with those describing themselves as ""discouraged"" by the Obama
presidency rising from 15 percent to 63 percent.
The second, by the Pew Research Center, shows that in August 2010 fewer Americans held a favorable view of Islam (30 percent) than five years
earlier during the Bush administration (41 percent), with more Americans (35 percent) saying Islam encourages violence more than other religions
(in 2002, it was 25 percent).
These starkly negative trend lines suggest the limited utility of language in fighting terrorism. Yes, terrorism is a propaganda-fueled activity – an
ongoing battle to win hearts and minds and attract new recruits to fight for the cause. And of course the language used in combating terrorism is vital
– the counterproductive ""smoke 'em out"" rhetoric of the Bush administration is a case in point.
But if rhetoric does not match policy, or appears to discount or play down threats, the credibility – and thus effectiveness – of the overall
counterterrorism strategy may be undermined. It appears the Obama administration has dug itself into just such a hole.
Rhetoric doesn't match policy
When looking beyond the nuanced language and appealing promises, what Muslims around the world see is an administration that has ramped up the
war in Afghanistan; is killing scores of Muslim civilians with drone strikes; continues to hold more than 1,000 Muslim detainees in Guantanamo,
Bagram, and other prisons; and maintains seemingly unconditional support of Israel.
This is not to critique these policies, but to point out that they do not match the raised expectations of the Muslim world and have only muddled
Obama's oft-stated goal of turning Muslims toward America and away from extremist movements.
The price of downplaying the threat
A large price is also being paid domestically for disconnected rhetoric. Despite maintaining nearly all of Bush's hard-line tactics — the USA Patriot
Act, warrantless surveillance, indefinite detentions the White House has consistently played down the threat, even in the face of a clear uptick in
terrorism activity.
For example, following the failed 2009 Christmas Day airline bombing, Obama described the suspect as an ""isolated extremist,"" despite his ties to Al
Qaeda. And the administration's initial response to the failed May 2010 Times Square bombing by an American Muslim trained in Pakistan was to
call it a ""one-off' event. Attorney General Eric Holder stated in congressional testimony that he believed these and other recent Islamic terror plots
were unconnected, and unrelated to radical Islam.
There is little doubt that the administration's unwillingness to speak candidly about Islamic terrorism has taken a toll on the public's trust. A Gallup
poll released last month shows Americans favoring Republicans over Democrats on the issue of terrorism 55 percent to 31 percent — up from 49
percent to 42 percent last fall.
Time to reverse the trend
Obama entered office promising to fight a smarter and more effective war on terrorism, and in many ways he has. His instincts to maintain aggressive
tactics while toning down inflammatory rhetoric were sound. Yet his administration seems to have overlearned a key lesson of the Bush years — that
overstating the threat of terrorism has costs attached. So, too, does rhetoric that understates the threat, especially when detached from policy.
It is not too late to reverse this troubling trend. The White House can begin by focusing less on overly reassuring rhetoric — which has not paid
dividends at home or abroad — and more on a candid accounting of the threats faced and the policies employed to confront them.
Stuart Gottlieb, a former foreign-policy adviser and speechwriter in the US Senate (1999-2003), is now director of policy studies at the Jackson Insti
tute for Global Affairs at Yale. He's the editor of ""Debating Terrorism and Counterterrorism: Con filo ting Perspectives on Causes, Contexts, and Re
sponses."" The original version of this piece appeared in the online edition of The National Interest.
© The Christian Science Monitor. All Rights Reserved. Terms under which this service is provided to you. Privacy Policy."
105;"I have been monitoring the wikipedia situation and working with the R team to try and be as prepared as we can.
I am heading to Indonesia on Monday for the opening of the new American Center and then to Malaysia where, among
other things, I plan to work with Paul Jones on the English language initiative.
I will be traveling all day Monday so unfortunately out of touch for about 18 hours. I will be in contact with my office as
soon as I land and can always cut the trip short if necessary, although, under the circumstances I think it is important to
keep to our schedules.
As we have discussed, one of the main drivers of our PD strategy is to ensure we have strong relations in all sectors to
help us weather the invitable storms in our relationships and at this point it looks like we have a hurricane on the
horizon.
Take care and look forward to seeing you when we both get back.
Jm"
105;"Agree. I love the AFT/NEA idea. Have you raised it with them? If they are interested I'd love to explore a global
partnership with them since there are a number of countries interested in expanding our programs and the exisiting
structures — peace corp, fulbright, etc just aren't organized to handle something like this.
See you when I get back.
Jm.
Jm"
105;"Perfect. See you next week.
Jrn"
105;"Helpful editorial in wp. We'll try and get pickup in international media.
Jm"
105;"McHale, Judith A <McHaleJA@state.gov>
Thursday, September 9, 2010 10:07 AM
Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Reines, Philippe I
FW: (AFP) Pastor says may halt Koran burning if White House asks
As we just discussed, below is the quote I referred to from pastor in Florida.
Let me know if you need me to do anything else.
jm"
105;More, original story.
105;"McHale, Judith A <McHaleJA©state.gov>
Thursday, September 9, 2010 10:28 AM
Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Reines, Philippe I
FW: Indian Home Minister Appeals to Media to Help Maintain Communal Harmony in
View of U.S. Pastor Threatening to Burn Quran
FYI, as Bob reported this morning. Note last sentence about action by ""US Authorities"",
Press Information Bureau
Government of India
Ministry of Home Affairs
09-September-2010 11:44 1ST
Home Minister Appeals to Media to Help Maintain Communal Harmony in View of U.S. Pastor
Threatening to Burn Quran
The Union Home Minister Slui P.Chidambaram has appealed to media to help maintain communal peace and
harmony in the wake of reports of a pastor in the United States threatening to burn the holy Quran. In a
statement issued here today, the Union Home Minister said that the act is calculated to increase strife between
different religious groups. Following is the text of his statement :
""There are reports of a pastor in the United States threatening to burn the Quran on September 11, 2010.
The US authorities have strongly condemned the statement of the pastor. Religious leaders all over the world
have also condemned his proposed action.
We condemn the action of the pastor. It is totally unbecoming of anyone who claims to be a man of religion. It
is obviously calculated to increase bitterness and strife between different religious groups. No one who is
interested in maintaining harmony and peace among different sections of the people can condone such action.
We hope that the US authorities will take strong action to prevent such an outrage being committed.
While we await the action of the US authorities, we would appeal to the media in India — both print and
visual media — to refrain from telecasting visuals or publishing photographs of the deplorable act. We
would also appeal to the media to exercise great restraint over the next couple of days and help in
maintaining communal peace and harmony.""
OK/KS
India Condemns U.S. Pastor's Plan to Burn the Quran, Urges
Media Restraint
By Bibhudatta Pradhan - Sep 9, 2010
India ""condemns"" a plan by a Florida pastor to burn copies of the Koran and the government hopes the U.S. will
take strong action against him, Home Minister Palaniappan Chidambaram said in New Delhi.
Terry Jones, pastor of the Dove World Outreach Center in Gainesville has been criticized by U.S. Secretary of
State Hillary Clinton and the Vatican for his plan to burn the Muslim holy book on Sept. 11. General David
Petraeus, commander of international coalition forces in Afghanistan, said the act would endanger U.S. troops.
Chidambaram urged Indian newspapers not to publish photographs of what he said would be a ""deplorable act""
and asked television channels to refrain from broadcasting images. The media must show restraint over the
""next couple of days and help in maintaining communal peace and harmony,"" the minister said, reading a
government statement.
The proposed burning ""is totally unbecoming of anyone who claims to be a man of religion,"" Chidambaram
said. About 13 percent of India's 1.2 billion people are Muslim.
Facing mounting criticism around the world and at home, Jones said yesterday that supporters have sent him
copies of the Koran to burn and he was not convinced ""that backing down is the right thing to do,"" Associated
Press reported.
To contact the reporter on this story: Bibhudatta Pradhan in New Delhi at bpradhan@bloomberg.net
Chris Hensman
Special Assistant
Office of the Under Secretary of State for Public Diplomacy and Public Affairs (R)
U.S. Department of State
2201 C St, NW Rm 5932
W: 202.647.91301 M: CZ: hensmancd@state.gov"
105;At the end of the day, it's all about sports
105;Fyi
105;"I agree. As you know I believe passionately that it is not in our national interests to continue to provide billions of dollars
in aid and assistance without the very people we are helping knowing we are the ones providing the assistance. Some of
our research in Pakistan indicates that many people believe the assistancee is coming from China and of course the
Chinese do nothing to correct the record.
I asked INR to provide me with an assessment of the current situation after the floods to determine the impact of our
assistance. I have also asked them to work with the IC to give us an accurate and unbiased assessment of the security
risks involved. I aksed for it a couple of weeks ago so hopefully they will have something we can use now which might be
helpful in drafting a response.
In terms of the security arguments he makes, it is worth noting that the incidents he references are situations where the
attacks occured in places where there was NO USG branding. The reality is that the terrorists attack any group or
institution which might impede their ability to prevail.
I had already planned a USAID/State meeting to address this issue this week. I'll try to get everyone together today or
tomorrow and will report back to you."
105;"Thx. I feel the same way! Just got off a call with usaid, srap and my team. We are drafting a response. I think we need
something firm, accurate and rapid. Still deciding who will sign and whether it will be an op ed or letter to the editor. I
want to be sure we avoid a public battle with the ngo community on this issue. UsAID is recommending that Raj meet
with Worthington and read him the riot act for the op ed.
Will forward the draft before we send.
8TW, USAID confirmed that there was no USG branding in the attacks Worthington references.
Jm"
105;"Fyi, good coverage.
Jm"
105;Fyi, in case you have not seen this. Interesting piece. I've attached a copy of the full article.
105;"Thought you'd like to see this. Rose did a great job, especially with Russian media, and the new system seems to be
working.
Sorry I didn't get to see you before you left. Hope you have a happy and peaceful holiday and actually manage to get a
bit of down time --- is that even possible???
Cheers,
jm"
105;"Thanks. Hooe you are having a good break
Happy New Year!"
105;"Interesting approach towards influencing popular attitudes. We are
I'm speaking at the Democracy conference in Bali today and then heading home tomorrow. Had a great trip to Indonesia.
Was also in Malaysia and met with Paul Jones on the educational initiative.
See you next week.
Jm"
105;"McHale, Judith A <McHaleJA@state.gov>
Thursday, December 9, 2010 8:11 PM
RE: LA Times/Laura King - Afghan TV police drama delivers message with zest
In Singapore now heading back this afternoon. Bali Forum interesting although some of the speeches (Iran) were
predictably tedious. No wiki mentions anywhere. Remind me to tell you about the Timor slamming of MCC.
The joys of foreign travel.
See you Monday.
jm"
105;"Fyi, 21st century engagement. Still a work in progress but off to a good start. Enjoy!
Jm"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
135;"Hillary:
I'm just boarding plane to Honduras and thinking of you especially with this painful tragedy in Libya.
Warmest,
Maria
U.S. Department of State
Case No. F-2015-04841
Doc No. C05739905
Date: 05/13/2015
STATE DEPT. - PRODUCED TO HOUSE SELECT BENGHAZI COMM.
SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT ON SENSITIVE INFORMATION & REDACTIONS. NO FOIA WAIVER. STATE-5CB0045242"
135;"Will do. Just returning from Africa AU meetings. Much to report.
Best,
Maria"
135;"The first woman professor tenured at Darmouth, who I know, described you as ""radiant"" at this event.
Cheers!
Under Secretary of State
for Democracy and Global Affairs
Department of State .
2201 C St NW Room 7261
Washington DC 20520
202 - 647-6240"
135;"Dear Secretary:
I was pleased to learn about your development speech this week, and offered the insights below to Anne-Marie earlier
today. Overall, it's a very good speech, and I look forward to hearing you deliver it tomorrow.
4. Mike, through Dan Baer, and I provided language to ensure consistency with the Human Rights Speech.
Thank you,
Maria
Under Secretary of State
for Democracy and Global Affairs
Department of State
2201 C St. NW Room 7261
Washington DC 20520
202 - 647-6240"
135;"Hillary:
I met with Holbrooke today on water. Pakistani military called it their third most important strategic issue. Great
worries about India/Pakistan tension over 1960 agreement that regulates Indus River. We agreed our teams will work
together, most likely through the World Bank supporting the Abu Dhabi Dialogue, which brings together representatives
from the seven countries that share the Indus River Basin. This is the best forum we know of where India and Pakistan
can meet to discuss water issues. In the context of the shared waters memo and chart I gave you last week, this ranks as
potentially one of the most conflict prone, and one where the US should engage to get the parties to work together.
We are advancing well in developing a policy/action plan for you to announce on World Water Day on March 22.
Safe travels to Latin America, so glad you are going.
Maria
Under Secretary of State
for Democracy and Global Affairs
Department of State
2201 C St. NW Room 7261
Washington DC 20520
202- 647-6240"
135;"Dear all:
Otero, Maria <OteroM2@state.gov>
Monday, January 18, 2010 9:41 AM
H; Slaughter, Anne-Marie; cheryl.mills
Fuchs, Michael H; Mauldin, Caroline P; Schonander, Carl E; Jones, Kerri-Ann
Re: Water
To update you, at G we have been working on water and World Water Day (the event planned takes place at the
National Geographic Building), since I am taking on water as the key issue I am/will working on. I sent S a memo on
water in December outlining our plans. Note that we are mandated to report to Congress annually as part of the ""Water
for the Poor"" Act.
I have met with Kerri-Ann, with OES ""water"" staff in the last weeks to address this and also with several regional bureau
A/S (Carson, Feltman, Blake so far) on water in the respective regions.
There is a great deal of interest on their part and we have started outlining specific initiatives that we could focus on.
We've also met on the Nile Basin Initiative, with World Bank ""experts"" leading NGOs, McKinsey, etc. I've also spoken to
Raj (USAID allocated about $480 million in FY 2009 to water, and MCC about $500 million) but of course he has been
unable to focus on this. And Cheryl and I haven't spoken yet about Food Security/water.
Best,
Maria"
135;"Hillary:
I had planned to meet with you on water after returning from Bolivia's inauguration - there is so much we can do.
Haiti is beyond what one's spirit can absorb. I am grateful that my former colleagues from ACCION, missing until friday,
are safe.
Best,
Maria"
135;"Hillary:
Per our conversation yesterday, please see Tim Wirth's response to Chris Smith's op-ed last Saturday in the WPost.
Others from the Global Leaders Council on Reproductive Health chaired by Mary Robinson (I am an ex officio
member)are also responding to the article.
Onward!
Maria"
135;"Just now returning from Bogota - v good trip. Toasted you from the Miami airport!
The totally very best to you,
Maria"
SenderPersonId;ExtractedBodyText
184;"Dear Hillary,
Best wishes to you and your family for a wonderful holiday season.
It has been an honor and a pleasure working for you this year, and I am eagerly looking forward to the challenges of
2010.
Warm personal regards,
Bob Hormats"
